--- Sayfa 2 ---
045579
afarttell  Initteraitg  ffiihrarg
3tljara,  New  §ork
FROM  THE
BENNO  LOEWY  LIBRARY
COLLECTED  BY
BENNO  LOEWY
1854-1919
BEQUEATHED  TO  CORNELL  UNIVERSITY

--- Sayfa 3 ---
DATE  DUE
rs&
»*~
r»'0g^
.-g^—
SAYLORO
PHINTBDINU-ft-A.
Cornell  University  Library
HS  381.H99
World's  Masonic  registencontaining  the
3  1924  015  970  811

--- Sayfa 4 ---
Cornell  University
Library
The  original  of  this  book  is  in
the  Cornell  University  Library.
There  are  no  known  copyright  restrictions  in
the  United  States  on  the  use  of  the  text.
http://www.archive.org/details/cu31924015970811

--- Sayfa 7 ---
WOKLD'S
MASONIC  REGISTER.

--- Sayfa 10 ---
Engraved  1y  S.JIGvmber,  FhilaB.a
from.  aThotba}

--- Sayfa 13 ---
WORLD'S
MASONIC    REGISTER:
CONTAINING!   THE
NAME,  NUMBER,  LOCATION,  AND  TIME  OP  MEETING  OP
EVERY  MASONIC  LODGE  IN  THE  WOULD,
SO     FAR    AS     KNOWN;
ALSO,  OF
Cteg  Cjmptcr,  Council,  ana  Commanbtrg  in  %  ^JnittB
States  ana  Canaan;
ALSO,  THE
DATE  OF  ORGANIZATION,  TIME  AND  PLACE  OP  MEETING  OF  EVERY
GRAND  LODGE,  GRAND  CHAPTER,  GRAND  COUNCIL,  AND  GRAND  COJIMANDERY
IN   THE   UNITED   STATES   AND   CANADA,
WITH  THB
STATISTICS  OF  EACH  MASONIC  JURISDICTION;
THE  NAME,  BUSINESS,  RESIDENCE,  AND  MASONIC  AFFILIATIONS  AND  TITLES
OF  EACH   SUBSCRIBER,  BESIDES   MUCH  USEFUL   AND  VALUABLE
MASONIC   INFORMATION.
BY
LEON    HYNEMAN.
PHILADELPHIA:
PRINTED   FOR   THE   AUTHOR   BY
J.    B.    L  I P  P  I N  C  0  T  T    &    CO.
1860.

--- Sayfa 14 ---
Hswt
Atp~3fyO><p
Entered,  according  to  Act  of  Congress,  in  the  year  1860,  by
M.   HYNEMAN.
In  the  Clerk's  Office  of  the  District  Court  of  the  United  States  for  the  Eastern
District  of  Pennsylvania.

--- Sayfa 15 ---
TO   THE   CRAFT   UNIVERSAL.
We  present  the  "  World's  Masonic  Register"  to  the  subscribers  and
the  fraternity  generally,  with  the  confident  assurance  that  the  work  will
meet  their  approval,  and  fully  come  up  to  their  expectations.  The  prom-
ises we  made  we  have  not  only  fulfilled  to  the  letter,  but  we  have  even
done  more,  as  will  be  seen  by  a  reference  to  the  Prospectus.  The  chro-
nological data  we  believe  to  be  entirely  reliable,  and  the  statistics  as
complete  as  it  was  possible  to  obtain  them  up  to  the  time  the  printer  was
ready  for  the  copy.  That  there  are  errors  in  the  work,  we,  however,
believe,  as  during  its  passage  through  the  press  we  were  most  sorely
afflicted.  In  publishing  a  work  so  comprehensive  as  this,  there  are  diffi-
culties which  make  it  impossible  to  have  the  data  complete  in  every  par-
ticular. We  will  only  refer  to  a  few  of  them.  There  are  some  of  the
Grand  Secretaries  who  not  only  delay  the  printing  of  their  Annual  pro-
ceedings to  a  period  when  they  are  of  little  practical  use  to  their  contem-
poraries, but  some  of  the  proceedings  are  deficient  in  many  particulars,
especially  those  which  do  not  contain  a  summary  of  the  statistics,  which
obliges  each  of  the  other  thirty-eight  Grand  Secretaries  to  wade  through
all  the  publications,  at  much  loss  of  time  and  patience.  The  majority  of
Grand  Secretaries,  however,  prepare  their  proceedings  with  a  dispatch
that  is  really  surprising,  and  show  a  disposition  to  excel  in  all  matters  con-
nected with  their  official  duties,  the  evidence  of  which  is  seen  in  the  elab-
orate and  complete  tables  which  they  furnish,  not  only  of  the  statistics  of
the  Grand  Bodies  in  their  respective  States,  but  of  every  other  Masonic
Jurisdiction.  Another  difficulty  is  that  there  is  no  uniform  time  of  meet-
ing of  Masonic  Grand  Bodies.  Annual  Communications  are  held  in
every  month  of  the  year,  and  hence,  if  the  publication  of  the  proceedings
(v)

--- Sayfa 16 ---
vi  TO   THE  CRAFT   UNIVERSAL.
should  be  delayed,  the  statistics  of  the  preceding  year,  or  perhaps  two  years
before,  must  be  taken,  which  is  often  the  case.  Again,  the  frequent
changing,  altering,  and  revising  of  Constitutions  is  another  difficulty.
Stability  in  legislation,  uniformity  in  the  time  of  meeting,  and  the  early
publication  of  the  Annual  proceedings  with  full  statistics,  are  essentially
necessary  to  exhibit  the  condition  of  the  Institution,  such  as  we  have
attempted  in  this  work.
The  Subordinate  Lodges  have  no  uniform  time  for  holding  their  elec-
tions, and  within  the  United  States  there  are  changes  of  officers  in  every
month  of  the  year ;  and  as  the  Lodges  in  many  jurisdictions  held  their
elections  in  November  and  December,  while  this  work  was  in  course  of
publication,  we  were  obliged,  in  such  cases,  to  give  the  names  of  the
officials  who  were  in  office.  "We  take  pleasure  in  acknowledging  ourselves
indebted  to  the  Grand  Secretaries  and  other  prominent  brethren  for
their  prompt  responses  to  our  requests  for  information,  sought  for  during
the  sessions  of  their  respective  Grand  Lodges.  The  deficiencies  and
errors  in  the  present  work  will  be  readily  seen  by  the  intelligent  Free-
mason, and  especially  the  Grand  Secretaries,  to  whom  they  will  be  a  guide
to  furnish  us  with  more  full  particulars,  and  make  corrections  where  they  are
needed,  in  order  that  the  work  which  we  propose  to  publish  at  the  close
of  the  present  year  may  be  perfect  and  complete  in  all  its  details.  We
will  be  under  many  obligations  to  the  brethren,  if  they  will  notify  us  of
any  errors  that  they  may  discover  in  this  book,  so  that  they  may  be  cor-
rected in  the  next  edition.  The  utility  of  a  work  such  as  the  "  World's
Masonic  Register"  must  commend  itself  to  the  judgment  of  every
Freemason.
The  subscribers  to  the  "  World's  Masonic  Guide,"  a  work  which
Brother  A.  A.  Lechler  had  purposed  publishing,  and  which  was  intended
to  be  similar  in  every  respect  to  the  "  World's  Masonic  Register,"  will
receive  a  copy  of  this  book,  as  the  "  Guide"  will  not  be  published.  The
subscribers  to  the  publication  will  be  benefited  by  this  arrangement.
Much  of  the  success  of  this  work  is  due  to  Brother  Marshall  0.  Wag-
goner, of  Norwalk,  Ohio,  through  whose  energy  and  application  the
largest  number  of  subscribers  was  obtained  for  it.
The  engraving  in  the  front  of  the  book  is  the  work  of  Brother  Stephen
A.  Gimber,  of  Philadelphia.    We  can  with  confidence  commend  Brother

--- Sayfa 17 ---
TO   THE   CRAFT   UNIVERSAL.  vii
Gimber  to  the  Craft  as  an  artist  of  superior  merit,  of  which  the  engrav-
ing is  satisfactory  evidence.
In  regard  to  the  getting  up  of  this  book,  no  expense  has  been  spared.
The  mechanical  part  of  the  work  throughout  was  executed  by  the  firm
of  J.  B.  Lippincott  &  Co.,  of  Philadelphia,  the  largest  book  publishing
house  in  the  country,  whose  well-established  reputation  needs  no  com-
ment from  us,  and  who,  as  the  subscribers  can  judge,  have  performed
their  duty  with  entire  satisfaction  and  credit  to  themselves.
In  the  arrangement  and  compilation  of  this  work  we  have  had  no
assistance.     The  whole  is  the  result  of  our  own  individual  labor.
We  believe  that  we  may  with  entire  confidence  rely  upon  every  sub-
scriber to  this  book  using  his  best  exertions  to  obtain  subscribers  for
the  next  edition,  for  which  see  Prospectus,  page  475.
We  were  extremely  careful  to  have  the  names  and  addresses  of  the
subscribers  correct  in  this  book,  and  if  there  are  any  errors,  the  fault
was  in  the  writing  of  those  who  sent  them  to  us.  The  original  manu-
script was  carefully  examined  by  the  compositors,  the  proof-readers,  and
ourselves,  and  in  all  cases  where  the  chirography  was  doubtful,  the  writ-
ing of  the  brother  was  critically  scrutinized  and  compared,  so  that  in-case
of  an  error  no  blame  could  be  attached  to  us.  We  believe,  however,
there  are  few  errors,  if  any,  in  this  work.  We  take  this  occasion  to  re-
mark that,  in  all  our  experience,  we  have  never  had  a  book  printed  by
more  careful  compositors,  nor  more  critical  and  correct  proof-readers,
than  those  engaged  by  the  Messrs.  J.  B.  Lippincott  &  Co.,  of  Philadel-
phia, at  whose  establishment  this  work  was  gotten  up  for  us.
We  would  especially  request  the  Grand  Secretaries  of  the  several
Grand  Lodges,  Grand  Chapters,  Grand  Councils,  and  Grand  Command-
eries,  to  forward  to  us,  regularly,  copies  of  the  Annual  proceedings  of
their  respective  Grand  Bodies.
We  want  Agents,  to  canvass  for  subscribers  for  the  World's
Masonic  Register,  in  every  City,  County,  and  State  in  America  and
Europe,  to  whom  liberal  compensation  will  be  given.  See  Prospectus,
page  475  of  this  volume.  Active  and  industrious  brethren,  possessing
the  requisite  qualifications,  will  find  this  a  respectable  and  remunerative
occupation.    Applications  must  be  accompanied  with  satisfactory  recom-

--- Sayfa 18 ---
Viii  TO   THE  CRAFT   UNIVERSAL.
mendationa.       Prospectuses  forwarded,   and    terms  made   known,    by
addressing
LEON  HYNEMAN,
World's  Masonic  Register  Office,
Philadelphia,  Pa.
UJ^T"  Agents  wanted,  to  canvass  for  the  Masonic  Library.  See
Prospectus,  page  416  of  this  volume.  We  can  promise  industrious  and
competent  brethren  a  rich  reward  for  their  labors  in  introducing  the  Ma-
sonic Library  among  the  Craft,  while  at  the  same  time  they  will  be
most  usefully  employed  in  disseminating  Masonic  information  of  the
highest  importance  to  the  fraternity.  Every  Freemason  should  possess
this  Masonic  Library.
Brethren  who  wish  to  canvass  for  subscribers  for  the  "  World's
Masonic  Register  and  Historical,  Biographical,  Chronological,
and  Statistical  Compendium,"  will  please  make  early  application,  as
we  wish  to  have  the  canvas  thorough  and  complete,  and  the  book  pub-
lished at  as  early  a  day  as  possible.  The  Agents  for  the  present  work
will  oblige  us  if  they  will  also  act  for  the  next  edition,  and  secure  sub-
scriptions in  their  several  districts  with  promptness  and  dispatch.
Igf  The  next  edition  of  the  World's  Masonic  Register  will
be  embellished  with  at  least  two  Steel  Engravings — one  of  them  the
Portrait  of  a  distinguished  Past  Grand  Master,  who  during  the  anti-
Masonic  persecution  was  a  tower  of  strength  and  support  to  the  Institu-
tion.

--- Sayfa 19 ---
CONTENTS.
Origin  of  Freemasonry   11
Ancient  Laws  and  Charges :  The  Commandments  15
Ancient  Records   15
Poem  on  the  Constitutions  of  Masonry   17
Glossary   36
Masonic  Regulations  a.l,  5663;  Charges  read  at
Installation ;  The  Charges  of  a  Freemason,  etc.  40
The  Old  Charges,  etc
  47
Alabama — Grand  Lodge;  Subordinate  Lodges...  51
Grand  Chapter;  Subordinate  Chapters    56
Grand  Council;  Subordinate  Councils;  Grand
Commandery    57
Subordinate  Commanderies   58
Subscribers'  Names — Alexandria,  Autauga  co.,
Butler  co.,  Carthage,  Covington  co.,  Dal-
las co
  58
Fosters,  Granville,  Montgomery    59
Montgomery  co.,  Newton,  North  Port,  Nota-
sulga,  Pike  co.,  Sandy  Ridge,  Selma,  Tal-
ladega, Tuscaloosa    60
West  of  China  Grove,  Woodstock,  etc    61
Arkansas — Grand  Lodge;  Subordinate  Lodges...  62
Grand  Chapter;  Subordinate  Chapters;  Grand
Council;  Grand  Consistory    66
Hugh  de  Payen's  Commandery,  No.  1    67
Subscribers'  Names    67
Dispensing  with  a  Supper   67
CALiFORNiA—Grand  Lodge    68
,     Subordinate  Lodges    69
Grand  Chapter   71
Subordinate  Chapters;  Grand  Commandery...  72
Subscribers'  Names — Forest  City,  San  Fran-
cisco, etc
  73
Canada — Grand  Lodge    74
Subordinate  Lodges    76
Grand  Chapter;  Subordinate  Chapters   79
Subscribers?  Names — Canada  East:  Cornwall,
Dunham,  Granby    79
Henrysville,  Lennoxville,  Montreal,  Quebec,
Sherbrooke,  St.  Johns.    80
Waterloo    81
Canada  West:  Almonte, Bollville    81
Berlin,  Bowman ville,  Brantford    82
Brockville,  Brighton    83
Caledonia,  Conestoga,  Chatham,  Clinton    84
Colborne,  Cobourg,  Collingwood,  Delaware..  85
Dundas,  Dunnville,  Exeter,  Frankford   86
Gait,  Glencoe,  Godericb..,    87
Guelph,  Hamilton    88
Hyde  Park,  Ingeraoll    89
Kingston    90
Komoka,  London    91
Newbury    92
Newcastle,  Paris,  Port  Hope    93
Port  Stanley,  Prescott,  Sarnia    94
Simcoe,  Sparta,  St.  Catharine's    95
St.  Mary's,  Strath  Roy    96
Stratford,  St.  Thomas,  Sylvan,  Toronto    97
Trenton,  Union,  Windsor    99
Woodstock,  Whitby   100
The  Recovered  Snuff-Box    101
Connecticut — Grand  Lodge;  Sub.  Lodges   102
Grand  Chapter;  Subordinate  Chapters    104
Grand  Council ;  Subordinate  Councils;  Grand
Encampment;  Sub. Encampments    105
Subscribers'  Names— Branford,  Middletown,
Deep  River,  East  Haddam,  Essex   106
Guilford,  Madison,  Meriden,  New  Haven...  107
Masonic  Friendship    108
Delaware— Grand  Lodge    109
Subordinate  Lodges;  Grand  Chapter;  Subor-
dinate Chapters
 i   110
Subscribers'  Names — Delaware  City,  Dover,
Middletown    110
St.  Georges,  Wilmington    Ill
District  of  Columbia — Grand  Lodge    112
Subordinate  Lodges;  Grand  Chapter;  Subor-
dinate Chapters;  Commandery   113
Subscribers'  Names— Georgetown,  Hopetown,
Washington    114
The  Robber  of  the  Desert    116
Florida — Grand  Lodge;  Subordinate  Lodges...  117
Grand  Chapter ;  Subordinate  Chapters    118
Grand  Council;  Sub.  Councils;  Commandery..  119
Subscribers'  Names   119
George  Washington   119
Georgia — Grand  Lodge    120
Subordinate  Lodges   121
Grand  Chapter;  Subordinate  Chapters    126
Grand  Council;  Grand  Commandery ;  Subor-
dinate  Commanderies    127
Subscribers'  Names — Athens,  Columbus,  West
Point,  Thomasville,  Savannah    128
Masonry  among  the  Arabs    129
Illinois— Grand  Lodge;  Subordinate  Lodges...  130
Grand  Chapter    137
Subordinate  Chapters    138
Grand  Council ;  Subordinate  Councils ;  Grand
Commandery    139
Subordinate  CommanderieB    140
Subscribers'  Names — Astoria,  Chicago    140
De  Kalb,  Gillespie,  Homer,  Nauvoo,  Odell,
Sidney    141
Vandalia,  Vermont,  etc
  142
Examine  Yourself,  Brother   143
Indiana — Grand  Lodge;  Subordinate  Lodges...  144
Grand  Chapter ;  Subordinate  Chapters    150
Grand  Council;  Subordinate  Councils;  Grand
Commandery    151
Subordinate  Commanderies    152
Subscribers'  Names — Aurora,  Bedford   152
Cambridge  City,  Columbus    153
Crawfordsville,  Delphi,  Elkhart    154
Fort  Wayne,  Huntington,  Indianapolis    155
Jeffersonville,   Knightstown,  La   Fayette,
Lebanon    156
LoganBport,  Madison,  New  Albany    157
Laporte,  Michigan  City,  Richmond    158
(ix)

--- Sayfa 20 ---
CONTENTS.
Salem,  Shelbyville,  South  Bend   159
Labor  and  Progress    159
Iowa— Grand  Lodge;  Subordinate  Lodges   161
Grand  Chapter ;  Subordinate  Chapters    165
Grand  Council ;  Subordinate  Councils ;  Com-
manderies    166
Subscribers'  Names    166
Man's  Onward  Progress    167
Kansas— Grand  Lodge;  Subordinate  Lodges....  169
Subscribers'  Names — Atchison,  Topeka.  Fort
Leavenworth    170
The  Indian  Chief  Tecumseh   170
Kentucky — Grand  Lodge;  Subordinate  Lodges..  171
Grand  Chapter;  Subordinate  Chapters    178
Grand  Council;  Subordinate  Councils;  Grand
Commanderv;  Subordinate  Commander-
ies   180
Subscribers'  Names — Cadiz    180
Covington,    Dycusburg,   Eddyville,  Eliza-
bethtown,  Frankfort,  Georgetown,  Green-
upsbnrg    181
Hopkinsville,  Lexington,  Louisville    182
Paris,  Shepherd  sville,  Wallonia,  etc   183
Historical  Memoranda    183
Louisiana — Grand  Lodge ;  Subordinate  Lodges.  184
Grand  Ch  apter ;  Subordi  ti  ate  Chapters ;  G  rand
Council   187
Subordinate  Councils;  Commanderies   188
Subscribers'  Names — Coushatta  Chute    188
New  Orleans    189
Conservatism   189
Maine — Grand  Lodge    191
Subordinate  Lodges    192
Grand  Chapter ;  Subordinate  Chapters ;  Grand
Council;    Subordinate  Councils;  Grand
Commandery    194
Subordinate  Commanderies    195
Subscribers'  Names — Albion,  Augusta,  Ban-
gor, Bath
  195
Belfast,    Belgrade,  Biddeford,  Bloomfield,
Denmark,  Frankfort,  Gardiner   196
Hallowell,  Kendall's  Mills,  Lewiston,  Lin-
colnville,  Mount  Vernon    197
Phillips,   Portland,  Richmond,  Readfield,
Skowhegan,  Searsport,   Stocton,  Water-
ville    198
Winthrop,  Wiscasset,  Yarmouth   199
Maryland — Grand  Lodge    200
Subordinate  Lodges;  Grand  Chapter    201
Commanderies    202
Subscribers'  Names — Baltimore    202
Bel  Air,  Churchville,  Darlington,  Elkton,
Lapidum    205
Philosophy  of  Masonry    205
Massachusetts — Grand   Lodge;   Subordinate
Lodges   207
Grand  Chapter    209
Subordinate  Chapters;  Grand  Council;  Sub-
ordinate Councils;  Grand  Commandery..  210
Subscribers'  Names — Bond's  Village,  Boston,
Brookfield,   Chicopee   Falls,  Greenfield,
Hyannis,  Northampton    211
Palmer,  Shelburne  Falls,  Thorndike,  Wake-
field, Ware,  Warren    212
Historical  Memoranda   212
Miohig  an— Grand  Lodge   _   213
Subordinate  Lodges    214
Grand  Chapter    216
Subordinate  Chapters;  Grand  Council;  Sub-
ordinate Councils ;  Grand  Commandery..  217
Subordinate  Commanderies    218
Subscribers'  Names — Adrian   218
Birmingham,  Cold  Water,  Corunna    219
Detroit,  Fentonville,  Grand  KapidB,  Hills-
dale   220
Hudson,  Ionia    221
Janesville,  Lake  Port,  Lowell,  Lyons    222
Monroe,  Owosso,  Pinckney,  Pontiac    223
Port  Huron    224
Saranac,    Sturgis,    St.  Johns,   Tecumseh,
Three  Rivers    225
Trenton,  White  Pigeon    226
Historical  Memoranda    226
Minnesota — Grand  Lodge ;  Subordinate  LodgeB  227
Grand  Chapter;  Subordinate  Chapters;  Com-
mandery   228
Subscribers'  Names    228
Mississippi — Grand  Lodge    229
Subordinate  Lodges    230
Grand  Chapter;  Subordinate  Chapters    234
Grand  Council;  Subordinate  Councils;  Grand
Commandery    236
Subordinate  Commanderies    237
Subscribers'    Names — Aberdeen,   Attala  co.,
Burnsville,  Ewards  Depot,  Gallatin   237
Hazlehurst,  Hickory  Flatts,  Holly  Springs,
Jacinto,  Jackson,  Juka  Springs,  Kosci-
usko. Maple  Springs,  Natchez    238
New  Albany,  North  Mt.  Pleasant,  Oxford,
Palo  Alto,  Rienzi,  Satartia,  Vicksburg,
Yazoo  City
  239
True  Progression  of  Masonry    239
Missouri— 43 rand  Lodge   241
Subordinate  Lodges    245
Grand  Chapter ;  Subordinate  Chapters ;  Coun-
cils   250
Grand  Commandery;  Subordinate  Command-
eries  251
Subscribers'  Names — Lagrange,  New  London,
Pacific,  St.  Joseph    251
St.  Louis    252
Nebraska — Grand  Lodge;  Subordinate  Lodges.  254
Condition  of  Masonry  in  Nebraska   254
A  Laughable  Incident   257
New  Hampshire — Grand  Lodge;   Subordinate
Lodges    258
Grand  Chapter    259
Subordinate  Chapters;  Grand  Commandery..  260
Subscribers'  Names — Exeter,  Milford,  Nashua  260
New  Jersey — Grand  Lodge;  Sub.  Lodges    261
Grand  Chapter;  Subordinate  Chapters ;  Grand
Council;  Subordinate  Councils   263
Grand  Commandery;  Subordinate  Command-
eries  *
  264
Subscribers'  Names — Belvidere,  Bordentown..  264
Camden,  Cranberry,  Elizabeth   265
Flemington,  Hackettstown,  Hightstown    266
Jamesburg,  Lambertville,  Lebanon,  Mount
Holly,  Newark    267
New  Brunswick,  New  Hampton,  Orange,
Paterson    270
Phillipsburg,    Rahway,    Ringoes,    Salem,
South  Amboy,  Titusville,  Trenton    271
Vincentown,  Warren  co    272
Historical  Memoranda,    272
New  York— Grand  Lodge   273
Subordinate  Lodges   275
Grand  Chapter;  Subordinate  Chapters    284
Grand  Council    286
Subordinate  Councils;  Grand  Commandery;
Subordinate  Commanderies    287
Subscribers'   Names— Addison,  Albany,  Al-
bion   288
Bath,  Binghamton    289
Bainbridge,  Barrington,  Bethany,  Brock-
port,  Buffalo,  Burdett,  Canandaigua    290
Cassadaga,  Cayuga,  Champlain,  Chemung..  291
Claverack,  Cohoes,  Cold  Springs    292
Corning,  Cortland,  Croton  Falls,  Cuba    293
Deposit,  Dunkirk    294
East  Clarkson,  East  Venice,  Elmira,  Facto-
ryville,  Fishkill  Lauding,  Fort  Edward...  295
Fredonia,  Friendship,  Fulton,  Genesee,  Ge-
neva   296
Goshen,  Hancock    297
Hastings,  Hornellsville,  Ithaca    298
Jamestown,  Kingstown,  Lansingburg    299
Leroy,  Little  Genesee,  Lockport,  Madrid    300
Malone,  Middletown,  Millport,  Moira   301
Newburg,  New  York,  Niagara  Falls   302
Nineveh,  North  Hoosick,  Ogdensburg    303
Olean,  Oswego,  Owego   304
Painted  Post,  Peekskill,  Pelhamville,  Penn
Yan    305
Phelps,  Port  Jervis   306
Potsdam,  Poughkeepsie,  Rhinebeck   307
Richburg,  Rochester,  Rondout,  Rouse's
Point    308

--- Sayfa 21 ---
CONTENTS.
XI
Saratoga  Springs,  Saugerties,  Seneca  Falls.  309
Sinclearville,  Sing  Sing,  Smithville  Flats,
Suspension  Bridge,  Syracuse   310
Tarrytown    311
Troy   312
TJnadilla  Forks    313
"Venice,  Waterford,  Waterloo,  Watertown,
Watkins,  Waverly   314
Wellsville,  West  Dresden,  Wcstfield,  Wind-
sor  315
The  Courtesy  of  Masonry    316
North  Carolina— Grand  Lodge;  Subordinate
Lodges    317
Grand  Chapter ;  Subordinate  Chapters    320
Grand  Council ;  Subordinate  Councils ;  Com-
mandery   321
Subscribers?  Names — Coleraine,  Edgecomb
co.,  Fayetteville,  Franklinton,  Hillsboro',
Leasburg,  Morganton,  MurfreeBboro',  Pee
Dee,  Stokes  co.,  White  Lake,  Wilming-
ton   322
Winton    323
Proselytism    323
Ohio — Grand  Lodge;  Subordinate  Lodges    324
Grand  Chapter    330
Subordinate  Chapters;  Grand  Council;  Sub-
ordinate Councils
 331
Grand  Encampment;  Subordinate  Encamp-
ments  „   332
Subscribers'  Names — Akron.-   332
Alliance   „   333
Ashtabula,  Bellair,  Berlin  Heights,  Bridge-
port, Canal  Dover   „..  334
Canton    335
Cincinnati    336
Circleville,  Cleveland    339
Clyde,  Conneaut,  Crestline     340
Dayton,  Delaware,  Eaton,  Elyria   341
Florence,  Fremont,  Hamilton    342
Lancaster,  Lebanon,  Lima    343
Mansfield,  Marietta,  Marion    344
Massilon   „    345
Minerva,  Mount  Gilead,  New  Philadelphia.  346
Norwalk   347
Orville    348
Painesville,  Portsmouth,  Port  Washington..  349
Ravenna,  SanduBky  City,  Steubenville    350
Uhricbsville,  Wellsville,  Willoughby.    351
Oregon— Grand  Lodge   „   352
Subordinate  Lodges;  Commandery.   353
Pennsylvania — Grand  Lodge    354
Subordinate  Lodges   357
Grand  Chapter ;  Subordinate  Chapters    361
Grand  Council ;  Subordinate  Councils    362
Grand  Commandery;  Subordinate  Command-
ed es....
  363
Subscribers'  Names — Alleghany  City,  Allen-
town    363
Altoooa    364
Ashland    365
Athens,  Auburn,  Bethlehem,  Birmingham,
Bloomsburg    366
Brack  ney,  Bridesburg,  Bristol,  Brownsville,
Catawissa,  Ceres,  Colebrook,  Columbia....  367
Columbus,    Cressona,    Danville,    Dimock,
Downingtown    368
Easton,  Erie,  Frankford,  Friendsville,  Gal-
litzin,  Gordon,  Great  Bend   369
Hamburg,    Hollidaysburg,     Holmesburg,
Kingston,  Lancaster,  Lewisburg    370
Llewellin,  Manaynnk,  Marietta,  Mauch
Chunk,    McWilliamstown,    Middleport,
Midway    371
Mill  ford,  Minersville,  Montrose,  Mount  Car-
mel,  Mount  Joy,  New  Castle,  New  Mil-
ford    372
Newtown,  Orwigsburg,  Palo  Alto,  Philadel-
phia  373
Pine  Grove,  Pittsburg    376
Pittston,  Port  Clinton,  Pottsville,  Provi-
dence, Reading
  378
Ringtown,    Schuylkill    Haven,    Scranton,
Selins  Grove,  Shamokin,  Sharon    379
Shingle  House,  Snyderville,  Spring  Mill,
St.  Clair,  Summit  Hill,  Sunbury,  Susque-
hanna Depot,  Tamaqua    380
Towanda    381
Tremont,  Treverton,  Uwchlan    382
Dedication  of  Lodges    382
Rhode  Island — Grand  Lodge    383
Subordinate  Lodges ;  Grand  Chapter ;  Subor-
dinate Chapters;  Grand  Council.-.    384
General  Wooster..-   385
Anti-Masonic  Incident   _   -    386
South  Carolina — Grand  Lodge   „   ...  387
Subordinate  Lodges    388
Grand  Chapter;  Subordinate  Chapters;  Grand
Council;  Commandery    390
Subscribers?  Names — Charleston,  Columbia..  391
Columbus,  Due  West  Corner,  Fairfield  Dis-
trict  392
The  Book  of  the  Law   392
Tennessef — Grand  Lodge ;  Subordinate  Lodges  393
Grand  Chapter;  Subordinate  Chapters    398
Grand  Council;  Subordinate  Councils;  Grand
Commandery ;    Subordinate    Command-
eries    399
Subscribers'  Names — Browns  ville,Clarksville,
Dyersburg   399
Grand  Junction,  Gravel  Hill,  Jackson,  La
Grange,  Memphis   400
Murfreesboro',  Nashville,  Newbern,  Win-
chester, Yorkville    401
Popularity  of  Freemasonry    402
Texas — Grand  Lodge    403
Early  History  of  Masonry  in  Texas   404
Subordinate  Lodges    406
Grand  Chapter   „    410
Subordinate  Chapters      411
Grand  Council;  Subordinate  Councils   __.  412
Grand  Commandery ;  Subordinate  Command-
eries
  413
Subscribers'   Names  —  Decatur,    McKinney,
Parker  City,  Weather  ford.'-    413
Ingratitude    414
Vermont — Grand  Lodge;  Subordinate  Lodges...  415
Grand  Chapter;  Subordinate  Chapters;  Grand
Council;  Subordinate  Councils    417
Grand  Commandery;  Subordinate  Command-
eries   -    418
Subscribers'  Names — Bellows  Falls,  Brandon,
Brattleboro'   418
Burlington   419
Middlebury,  Putney,  Rutland   „   _.  420
St.  Alban's,  Vergennes,  Windmill  Point.....  421
Origin  of  Gridiron  in  Making  Masons    422
Virginia — Grand  Lodge   423
Subordinate  Lodges    424
Grand  Chapter    427
Subordinate  Chapters;  Grand  Commandery;
Subordinate  Commanderies    428
Subscribers'  Names — Abingdon,  Bcrnwood,
Brucetown,  Cameron,  Chuckatuck,  Lun-
enburg Court  House    429
Lynchburg,  Norfolk,  Pleasant  Grove,  Ports-
mouth, Richmond,  Roseby's  Rock,  Suf-
folk   430
Waynesborough,  Wheeling.    431
Woodstock    432
Influence  of  Freeemasonry   432
Washington  Territory — Grand  Lodge;  Subor-
dinate Lodges
  433
Judge  Mildly    434
Wisconsin — Grand  Lodge   v    435
Subordinate  Lodges    436
Grand  Chapter ;  Subordinate  Chapters    438
Grand  Council ;  Subordinate  Councils;  Grand
Commandery ;  Subordinate  Command-
eries   439
Subscribers'  Names — Janesville    439
Lake  Mills,  Mineral  Point,  Monroe,  Platte-
villei.
  440
Racine,  Springville,  Viroqua    441
The  Level  of  Time    441
Statistical  Table  of  Grand  Lodges    442
Grand  Masters  and  Grand  Secretaries,  and  their
Addresses   443
Statistical  Table  of  Grand  Chapters   444

--- Sayfa 22 ---
CONTENTS.
G.  H.  Priests  and  Grand  Secretaries,  and  their
Addressee   445
Statistical  Table  of  Grand  Councils    446
M.  P.  G.  Masters  and  Grand  Recorders,  and  their
Addresses   447
Statistical  Table  of  Grand  Commanderies    448
Royal  Arch  Chapters    449
General  Grand  Chapter    450
Officers  of  General  Grand  Chapter    452
Grand  Encampment  of  U.  S
  453
Officers  of  Grand  Encampment  of  U.S   456
Fundamental  Principles    457
Prospectus    475
Masonic  Library   476
England — Grand  Lodge    477
Subordinate  Lodges    482
Subscribers'  Names — Liverpool,  London    496
Ireland    497
Isle  of  Man;  Isle  of  Jersey    504
Scotland    505
Subscribers*  Names    508
History  and  Antiquities  of  Freemasonry :
France    509
Germany    511
Holland    515
Denmark  and  Sweden    517
RusBia    518
Spain,  Portugal, and  Italy    519
Switzerland,  Hungary,  Poland,  Bohemia...  522
Flanders  and  Brabrant,  Asia    525
Turkey,  Oceanica    526
Africa    527
Masonry  in  Beunos  Ayres    52S
France   529
French  Colonies — Algery,  Senegal,  He  de  la
Reunion,  French  Indies,  French  Antilles,
French  Guyana,  Oceanica    533
Germany— Grand  Lodge  of  Three  Globes,  Ber-
lin    534
Grand  Lodge  of  Germany,  Berlin — Swedish.
System   536
Grand  Lodge  of  Prussia,  Berlin   538
Grand  Lodge  of  Hamburg    539
Grand  Mother  Lodge  of  Eklekta  Union,  Frank-
fort-on-the-Main   539
Grand  Lodge  of  Hanover    540
Grand  Lodge  of  Saxony,  in  Dresden    540
Grand  Lodge  of  Bavaria,  in  Bayreuth    541
Grand  Lodge  of  Darmstadt,  Hessia   541
Isolated  Lodges  in  Germany    541
Switzerland — Grand  Lodge,  Alpina,in  Basle...  542
Denmark— Grand  Lodge,  in  Copenhagen    543
Sweden  and  Norway— Grand  Lodge,  in  Stock-
holm   543
Belgium — Supreme  Conseil  de  Belgiqne    544
Holland — Grand  Nat.  Moeder-Loge   545
Dutch  Colonies    546
Spain — Grand  Lodge,  Madrid    547
Canada — Under  Grand  Lodges  of  England,  Ire-
land, and  Scotland    547
New  Brunswick   548
Nova  Scotia   ,
  548
South  America— Venezuela.-    549
New  Granada,  Montevideo,  Lima,  Chili    550
Buenos  Ayres,  Lodges  under  Grand  Orient  of
Peru    551
Brazil    551
Under  Grand  Lodges  of  England  and  Ire-
land    554
Central  America;  Mexico   554
Europe— Under  Grand  Lodges  of  England  and
Ireland    555
West  Indies    556
Australasia — New  South  Wales    557
South  Australia,  Victoria    558
New  Zealand,  West  Australia,  Tasmania    559
East  Indies    560
Turkey,  Asia  Minor.    562
China    562
Africa    563
APPENDIX.
Subscribers'  Names:
Arkansas — Benton    564
California — Visalia    564
Canada — Toronto.:    564
Connecticut — Collinsville,  Mystic   Bridge,
New  Haven.   *.    564
Norwalk    565
Massachusetts — Boston,  Whitinsville    565
New  Mexico— Santa  Fe    565
New  York — Albany,  Colesville    565
Nova  Scotia — Halifax    565
Pennsylvania — Bridgewater,  Harrisburg._.  565
Milesburg,  Philadelphia,  Williamsburg..  566
Wisconsin — West  Hurley    560

--- Sayfa 23 ---
WORLD'S  MASONIC  REGISTER.
ORIGIN  OF  FREEMASONRY.
Freemasonry,  at  this  time  the  most  permanent  and  widely  extended  associa-
tion on  the  globe,  had  its  origin  in  a  remote  antiquity,  and  embraces  among  its
membership  men  of  all  classes  and  conditions,  from  the  humble  artisan  to  the
king  on  the  throne,  and  men  of  every  variety  of  political  opinions  and  of  every
shade  of  religion  founded  upon  a  belief  and  adoration  of  the  great  I  Am.
Although  the  origin  of  Freemasonry  has  been  considered  a  mystery  by  the
many,  its  footprints  are  visible  in  every  age  and  its  records  traced  through  all
the  distant  past.  The  original  basis  of  Freemasonry  was,  doubtless,  a  compact
or  solemn  agreement  entered  into  between  its  originators  to  worship  the  one
living  and  true  God,  the  Creator  of  all  worlds,  at  a  time  when  the  crudest
notions  prevailed  in  regard  to  Deity;  when  a  multiplicity  of  gods  were  wor-
shiped, and  the  most  degraded  observances  in  the  name  of  religion  were  prac-
ticed. This  compact  may,  with  a  great  degree  of  certainty,  be  traced  to  have
originated  with  Joseph  and  his  brethren  in  Egypt,  as  at  no  other  period  of  the
world's  history  does  there  appear  to  have  existed  a  necessity  for  a  mutual  agree-
ment of  such  a  nature.  The  beginning  of  Freemasonry  was  the  administering
an  obligation  by  Joseph  to  his  brethren,  after  the  decease  of  their  father  Jacob,
binding  them  to  continue  steadfast  in  their  belief  in  the  Creator  of  the  universe
and  to  deal  justly  with  their  fellow-man.  The  diversity  of  individual  character
and  the  differences  in  the  moral  status  of  the  human  family  necessitated,  how-
ever, in  time,  additional  obligations  to  the  original  compact,  and  also  additional
qualifications,  and  thus  Freemasonry  gradually  developed  until  it  matured  into
a  perfect  organization  at  the  building  of  the  Temple  by  Solomon.  As  the  chil-
dren of  Israel  were  in  constant  intercourse  with  the  Egyptians,  some  fell  into
their  habits  and  customs,  and  in  a  measure  departed  from  the  faith  of  their
fathers,  and  thus  the  moral  qualifications,  as  an  additional  prerequisite  to  a  belief
in  Deity,  was  rendered  essential  to  be  admitted  into  the  covenanted  brother-
hood. Thus  the  developments  of  the  moral  elements  of  Freemasonry  grew  out
of  the  frailty  of  the  human  heart  and  the  desire  manifested  for  the  "  flesh  pots
of  Egypt."  Moses  in  early  life  entered  into  the  covenant,  and  while  in  the  land
of  Midian,  where  he  lived  a  life  of  seclusion  for  a  period  of  forty  years,  inspired
by  Divine  Wisdom,  he  elaborated  his  excellent  code  of  laws,  embracing  every
duty  that  man  owes  to  God  and  to  his  fellow-man,  and  every  essential  to  his
happiness  in  this  and  the  future  life.  The  Decalogue,  which  forms  the  basis  of
the  moral  law  of  every  people,  was,  soon  after  it  was  promulgated,  adopted  as
2  (11)

--- Sayfa 24 ---
12  world's  masonic  register.
the  standard  of  qualifications  of  those  who  sought  to  be  and  were  considered
worthy  of  being  received  into  the  covenant;  and  it  was  duriDg  the  sojourn  of
the  children  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness  that  the  humanizing  principles  were
adopted  which  form  the  crowning  glory  of  Freemasonry,  exalting  it  for  its  ex-
pansive love  and  practical  sympathy  far  above  all  other  institutions.  At  the
building  of  the  Tabernacle,  Moses  arranged  and  classified  those  who  were  en-
gaged in  its  construction  according  to  their  capacities,  and  there  originated  that
symbolic  instruction  which  Solomon,  some  centuries  afterward,  adopted  at  the
building  of  the  Temple.  It  was  at  this  period  that  the  working  tools,  which  form  a
peculiar  characteristic  of  Freemasonry,  with  their  monitorial  illustrations,  were
introduced.  These  symbols  were  used  for  a  twofold  purpose :  one  to  remind  the
children  of  Israel  of  the  bondage  from  which  they  had  just  been  liberated,  and
the  other  for  the  purpose  of  imparting  moral  instruction.  The  working  tools,
with  which  they  had  become  familiar,  were  thus  invested  with  an  interest  which
made  their  labors  light  and  evoked  thought.  They  were  no  longer  the  simple
implements  of  labor,  but  stern,  earnest,  solemn  teachers,  speaking  to  the  heart,
and  impressing  upon  the  mind  lessons  of  the  highest  import.  The  duties  of
life,  for  the  proper  development  of  the  physical  man  and  the  intellectual  facul-
ties, were  taught  by  those  quiet  instructors.  They  taught  the  government  of
the  passions,  the  regulation  and  proper  appropriation  of  time,  the  necessary  ob-
servances for  the  maintenance  of  health,  sympathy  for  the  poor  and  unfortunate,
practical  benevolence,  charity  in  its  most  extended  signification,  man's  duties
to  his  family,  his  neighbor,  his  country,  and  his  God.  And  to  render  their
teachings  more  impressive  and  effectual,  they  were  first  placed  upon  an  Altar
consecrated  to  Deity;  a  simple  altar,  upon  which  no  metallic  tool  had  been
lifted,  about  which  nothing  offensive  or  defensive  could  appear,  around  which  all
in  humble  position  bent  the  knee  to  one  common  Father,  and  there  the  solemn
and  all-important  lessons  were  communicated  by  authorized  teachers.  The
fundamental  principles  which  constitute  the  landmarks  of  Freemasonry,  its
moral  teaching,  its  symbolic  illustrations,  were  all  engrafted  by  Moses  upon  the
organization  formed  of  those  admitted  into  the  covenant;  and  in  all  the  course  of
time,  the  ages  through  which  the  institution  has  passed,  no  principle  of  moral
ethics  has  been  added  to  the  original  code ;  it  culminated  in  its  highest  perfec-
tion under  the  Grand-Mastership  of  Moses.  The  Temple  of  Freemasonry  rests
upon  solemn  covenants  obligatory  upon  all  who  have  voluntarily  assumed  its
obligations.  The  original  covenant  of  a  belief  in  Deity,  imposed  by  Joseph
upon  his  brethren  in  Egypt,  forms  theirs*  requirement  of  Freemasonry  at  this
time,  and  ever  has  been  a  primary  and  necessary  qualification.  It  is  not  possi-
ble to  conceive  of  a  purer,  or  nobler,  or  more  stable  foundation  than  that  upon
which  the  Temple  of  Freemasonry  is  constructed.  No  other  institution  can
claim  an  origin  so  exalted,  so  purely  divine  and  holy.
There  are  some  writers  who  absurdly  claim  that  Freemasonry  originated  with
the  Adam  of  Moses,  the  first  man;  others  that  it  originated  with  the  priests  of
Egypt;  some  find  a  resemblance  in  the  religious  rites  of  the  worship  of  the
heathen  deities ;  and  others,  again,  ascribe  its  origin  to  a  body  of  operative
masons  who,  for  their  mutual  protection,  established  signs  and  symbols  by  which
they  could  recognize  each  other.  But  these  pretensions  are  as  absurd  as  they
are  ridiculous.    Freemasonry  had  no  other  origin  than  the  assuming  of  a  cov-

--- Sayfa 25 ---
world's  masonic  register.  13
enant  to  continue  steadfast  in  the  belief  of  the  only  one  living  and  true  God,
the  Creator  of  heaven  and  earth;  and  the  Masonic  institution  could  not  have
originated  in  any  other  way  than  as  we  have  stated,  as  its  requirements,  symbol-
ism, teachings,  and  ceremonials  plainly  prove.
As  the  children  of  Israel  had  been  held  in  a  state  of  bondage  by  the  Egyp-
tians, they  being  originally  freemen,  freeborn,  after  their  exodus  from  Egypt,
the  principle  was  adopted  as  a  fundamental  law  of  the  covenanted  brotherhood
that  no  bondman,  only  those  who  were  freeborn,  freemen,  should  be  received
into  the  covenant;  and  through  all  the  intervening  ages  down  to  the  present
time  this  has  constituted  a  landmark  of  Freemasonry.
The  physical  qualifications  which  in  later  times  have  been  regarded  as  relat-
ing solely  to  the  limbs  and  physical  senses  of  the  outward  man,  had  a  more
extended  application  when  they  were  first  considered  necessary  as  prerequisites
to  admission  into  the  covenant.  The  object  was  to  admit  those  only  who  had
not  violated  the  laws  of  their  own  natures,  those  only  who  had  lived  regularly,
were  temperate  in  all  things,  had  not  indulged  vitiated  or  depraved  appetites,
had  not  impaired  their  physical  or  mental  organisms,  so  that  the  soul  or  spirit
could  act  with  perfect  freedom  in  the  fulfillment  of  its  mission,  in  its  progress
onward  and  upward,  developing  fully  its  strength  and  majesty  through  all  the
eternal  ages  of  its  immortality.  Thus  the  qualifications  hale  and  sound,  not
deformed  nor  dismembered,  perfect  and  upright,  are  not  only  based  upon  the
soundest  philosophy,  but  their  object  was  the  perfection  of  the  being  created  in
the  image  and  likeness  of  God.
It  may  reasonably  be  inferred  that  in  the  early  ages,  when  our  institution
first  had  birth,  that  the  time  devoted  for  the  assemblies  of  the  brotherhood  was
wholly  taken  up  with  serious  and  solemn  instruction,  with  the  labors  necessary
to  receive  the  neophyte  into  the  covenant,  with  teaching  the  fundamental  prin-
ciples of  the  association,  its  symbolism,  etc.,  and  for  these  reasons  the  gentler
sex  were  excluded,  as  the  natural  endearments  of  husband  and  wife,  of  brother
and  sister,  of  affianced  loved  ones,  would  in  a  great  degree  attract  the  attention
away  from  the  high  and  holy  purposes  in  which  they  were  engaged.
The  elective  franchise,  which  is  the  charter  of  liberty,  was  instituted  in  the
early  organization  of  the  cpvenanted  brotherhood,  and  through  all  the  dark  ages,
in  all  despotic  governments,  the  brethren  in  their  mystic  associations,  as  in  all
the  Masonic  lodges  at  the  present  time,  in  all  countries,  monarchical  or  other-
wise, preserved  and  maintained  the  very  principles  of  free  democratic  institu-
tions, and  not  only  was  the  elective  franchise  exercised  in  the  voluntary  choice
of  officers  to  preside,  rule,  and  govern,  but  also  as  to  the  reception  of  those
desiring  to  be  admitted  into  the  fraternity.
The  landmarks  of  Freemasonry,  recognized  as  such  at  the  present  day,  were
established  at  the  remote  periods  referred  to,  and  the  system,  as  regards  its
principles,  philosophy,  and  morality,  embrace  the  whole  of  man's  duties  to  God,
his  neighbor,  his  family  and  himself.
The  relation  which  Freemasons  sustain  toward  each  other  renders  necessary
that  the  duties  illustrated  in  the  points  of  fellowship  should  be  the  rule  and
standard  to  govern  the  fraternity  in  their  intercourse  with  each  other.  These
duties  bind  in  the  closest  relationship  the  members  of  the  Masonic  Order,  and
its  obligations  unite  them  in  the  golden  chain  of  brotherhood.     Within  the

--- Sayfa 26 ---
14  world's  masonic  register.
mystic  sanctums  brother  meets  brother  in  fond-  embrace,  and  vows  of  fidelity
are  registered  on  the  heart  which  neither  flint  nor  steel  can  erase.
The  pulse  of  affection  beats  strong,  as,  hand  firmly  grasped  in  hand,  the  mys-
tery is  communicated  which  binds  in  a  golden  chain  the  members  of  the  mystic
tie.  A  Mason's  feet  will  not  grow  weary  in  a  brother's  cause,  although  the
way  be  long  and  rough ;  the  voice  of  a  brother  in  distress,  a  brother's  cry  for
assistance,  finds  a  responsive  echo  in  a  Freemason's  breast,  and  with  alacrity  he
will  fly  to  his  relief,  and  cheerfully  perform  those  duties  which  sympathy  and
humanity  require.
A  Freemason's  duties  toward  his  brethren  do  not  cease  with  rendering
those  services  which  our  common  humanity  demands — nay,  there  are  others
equally  binding  of  the  most  sacred  nature.  In  the  silent  hour  of  the  night,  in
the  secret  chamber,  in  his  devotions  to  the  Merciful  Father,  on  bended  knees,
he  will  always  remember  his  brethren  of  the  mystic  tie.
A  Freemason  whose  life  corresponds  to  the  teachings  of  our  ritual,  who
studiously  observes  all  that  which  it  enjoins,  who  practices  all  of  its  obligations,
to  such  a  one  a,  brother  may  in  confidence  repose.  The  counsel  of  a  brother
who  will  assist  us  in  our  need,  and  remember  us  in  his  devotions,  we  may  be
assured  will  be  divested  of  every  selfish  consideration,  and  to  his  bosom  we  may
confide  the  trials  and  the  difficulties  incident  to  our  struggles  in  this  life.  His
breast  will  be  a  safe  repository  of  all  that  he  receives,  and  to  him  may  be  en-
trusted with  safety  such  confidential  communications  of  an  honorable  nature  as
we  would  only  impart  to  one  who  felt  a  real  interest  in  our  welfare.
A  true  brother  is  more  than  a  friend.  He  is  bound  by  the  golden  chain  of
love,  and  in  prosperity  and  adversity,  in  all  the  trials  of  life,  remains  not  only
firm,  but  sticketh  closer,  and  the  rivets  are  more  firmly  forged  in  misfortune,  in
distress  and  danger;  yea,  he  will  fly  to  rescue  his  brother  in  the  hour  of  peril
even  though  his  life  should  be  endangered  thereby.
A  true  brother  may  not  only  be  entrusted  confidentially  with  the  secret  com-
munings of  our  own  breast,  but  he  will  defend  his  brother  from  the  aspersions  of
malice,  hatred  or  jealousy,  in  his  absence  as  well  as  in  his  presence.
These  are  all  points  which  the  bonds  of  fraternity  and  close  relation  of  brother-
hood naturally  and  constitutionally  exact.
The  design  of  Freemasonry  is  to  improve,  elevate,  and  exalt  the  members  of
the  fraternity,  so  that  they  may  adorn  the  temple  of  the  living  God.  This  life
is  but  an  initiatory  probation.  There  is  a  world  beyond,  in  which  higher  degrees
are  in  reserve— in  which  higher  mysteries  will  be  unfolded— but  man's  duty  here
on  earth  is  to  live  a  life  of  purity  in  conformity  to  the  teachings  of  Freemasonry,
and  then,  when  the  gavel  of  the  Supreme  Grand  Master  shall  call  us  away,
death  will  have  no  sting,  and  we  will  advance  onward  in  our  progressive  mission
to  the  unseen  world,  knowing  no  fear,  no  danger,  and  we  will  enter  the  mansions
of  light  in  God's  eternal  world,  and  continue  our  labors  throughout  an  endless
immortality,  seeking  for  more  and  more  light  from  the  exhaustless  lamp  of
wisdom  of  God  the  Father.    So  mote  it  be.

--- Sayfa 27 ---
world's  masonic  register.  15
ANCIENT  LAWS  AND  CHARGES.
THE  COMMANDMENTS.
The  Decalogue  contains  the  original  laws  of  Freemasonry : —
"I  Am  the  Lord  thy  God,  who  have  brought  thee  out  of  the  land  of  Egypt,
out  of  the  house  of  slavery.     Thou  shalt  have  no  other  gods  before  me.
"Thou  shalt  not  make  unto  thyself  any  graven  image,  or  any  likeness  of  any-
thing that  is  in  heaven  above,  or  that  is  on  the  earth  beneath,  or  that  is  in  the
water  under  the  earth.  Thou  shalt  not  bow  thyself  down  to  them,  nor  serve
them ;  for  I  the  Lord  thy  God  am  a  jealous  God,  visiting  the  iniquity  of  the
fathers  upon  the  children  unto  the  third  and  fourth  generation  of  them  that
hate  me ;  and  showing  mercy  unto  the  thousandth  generation  of  them  that
love  me,  and  keep  my  commandments.
"Thou  shalt  not  take  the  name  of  the  Lord  thy  God  in  vain;  for  the  Lord
will  not  hold  him  guiltless  that  taketh  his  name  in  vain.
"  Eemember  the  Sabbath  day  to  keep  it  holy.  Six  days  shalt  thou  labor  and
do  all  thy  work.  But  the  seventh  day  is  the  Sabbath  in  honor  of  the  Lord  thy
God :  in  it  thou  shalt  no't  do  any  work,  neither  thou,  nor  thy  son,  nor  thy  daugh-
ter, thy  man-servant,  nor  thy  maid-servant,  nor  thy  cattle,  nor  thy  stranger  that  is
within  thy  gates.  For  in  six  days  the  Lord  made  the  heavens  and  the  earth,  the
sea,  and  all  that  is  in  them,  and  rested  the  seventh  day;  therefore  the  Lord
blessed  the  Sabbath  day,  and  hallowed  it.
"Honor  thy  father  and  thy  mother,  in  order  that  thy  days  may  be  prolonged
upon  the  land  which  the  Lord  thy  God  giveth  thee.
"  Thou  shalt  not  kill.
"Thou  shalt  not  commit  adultery.
"  Thou  shalt  not  steal.
"Thou  shalt  not  bear  false  witness  against  thy  neighbor.
"Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neighbor's  house.  Thou  shalt  not  covet  thy  neigh-
bor's wife,  nor  his  man-servant,  nor  his  maid-servant,  nor  his  ox,  nor  his  ass,  nor
anything  that  is  thy  neighbor's." — [Rev.  I.  Leeser's  Translation,  Philadelphia.)
The  whole  of  the  Decalogue  is  embraced  in  the  commandments: —
"Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God,"  and  "Thou  shalt  love  thy  neighbor  as
thyself."
ANCIENT  RECORDS.
In  profane  history  early  mention  is  made  of  the  fraternity  of  Freemasons.
In  the  year  a.l.  4300,  history  records  the  following : —
"St.  Alban loved  Masons  well  and  cherished  them  much,  and  he  made  their  pay
right  good,  viz  ,  two  shillings  per  week,  and  three  pence  to  their  cheer ;  whereas
before  that  time,  through  all  the  land,  a  Mason  had  but  a  penny  a  day  and  his
meat,  until  St.  Alban  amended  it.  He  also  obtained  of  the  king  a  charter  for
the  Freemasons  for  to  hold  a  General  Council,  and  gave  it  the  name  of  Assem-

--- Sayfa 28 ---
16  world's  masonic  register.
bly,  and  was  thereat  himself  as  Grand  Master,  and  helped  to  make  Masons,  and
gave  them  good  charges,  etc."
In  the  year  a.l.  4924,  in  the  reign  of  Athelstan,  the  craft  were  under  the
charge  of  his  brother  Edwin,  who  obtained  a  royal  charter  from  the  king  em-
powering the  craft  to  meet  and  hold  an  Annual  Communication  in  the  City  of
York.     The  ancient  record  reads  as  follows : —
"That  tho'  the  ancient  records  of  the  Brotherhood  in  England,  were  most  of
them  destroyed  or  lost  in  the  wars  with  the  Danes,  who  burnt  the  monasteries
where  the  records  were  kept,  yet  King  Athelstan,  (the  grandson  of  Alfred,)  the
first  anointed  king  of  England,  who  translated  the  Holy  Bible  into  the  Saxon
language,  when  he  had  brought  the  land  into  Best  and  Peace,  built  many  great
works,  and  encouraged  many  Masons  from  Prance  and  elsewhere,  whom  he  ap-
pointed overseers  thereof;  they  brought  with  them  the  Charges  and  Kegula-
tions  of  the  foreign  Lodges,  and  prevailed  with  the  king  to  increase  the  wages.
"That  Prince  Edwin,  the  king's  brother,  being  taught  Geometry  and  Masonry,
for  the  love  he  had  to  the  said  craft,  and  to  the  honorable  principles  whereon  it
is  grounded,  purchased  a  free  charter  of  King  Athelstan,  his  brother,  for  the
Freemasons  having  among  themselves  a  correction,  or  a  power  and  freedom  to
regulate  themselves,  to  amend  what  might  happen  amiss,  and  to  hold  a  yearly
communication  in  a  General  Assembly.
"That  accordingly  Prince  Edwin  summoned  all  the'Free  and  Accepted  Ma-
sons in  the  realm,  to  meet  him  in  a  congregation  at  York,  who  came  and  formed
the  Grand  Lodge  under  him  as  their  Grand  Master,  a.  l.  4926.
"That  they  brought  with  them  many  old  writings  and  records  of  the  craft,
some  in  Greek,  some  in  Latin,  some  in  French  and  other  languages;  and  from
the  contents  thereof,  they  framed  the  Constitutions  of  the  English  Lodges,  and
made  a,  law  for  themselves,  to  preserve  and  observe  the  same  in  all  time
coming."
In  the  reign  of  Edward  III.,  who  came  to  the  throne  a.l.  5327,  the  following
is  recorded : —  x
"  That  in  the  glorious  reign  of  King  Edward  III.,  when  Lodges  were  many
and  frequent,  the  Grand  Master  with  his  "Wardens,  at  the  head  of  the  Grand
Lodge,  with  the  consent  of  the  Lords  of  the  realm,  then  generally  Freemasons,
ordained —
"  Thai  for  the  future,  at  the  making  or  admission  of  a  brother,  the  Constitu-
tions and  the  Charges  shall  be  read.
"That  Master  Masons,  or  Masters  of  "Work,  shall  be  examined  whether  they
be  able  of  cunning  to  serve  their  respective  Lords,  as  well  the  highest  as  the
lowest,  to  the  honor  and  worship  of  the  foresaid  art,  and  to  the  profit  of  their
Lords ;  for  they  be  their  Lords  that  employ  and  pay  them  for  their  travel.
"That  when  the  Master  and  "Wardens  preside  in  a  lodge,  the  Sheriff,  if  need
be,  or  the  Mayor,  or  the  Alderman  (if  a  brother)  where  the  chapter  is  held,
shall  be  sociate  to  the  Master,  in  help  of  him  against  rebels  and  for  upholding
the  rights  of  the  realm.
"That  Enter'd "Prentices  at  their  making  shall  be  charged  not  to  be  thieves,
nor  thieves  maintainers.  That  the  Fellow  Crafts  shall  travel  honestly  for  their
pay,  and  love  their  fellows  as  themselves;  and,  that  all  shall  be  true  to  the
King,  to  the  realm,  and  to  the  Lodge.

--- Sayfa 29 ---
r  world's  masonic  register.  17
"  That  if  any  of  the  fraternity  should  be  fractious,  mutinous,  or  disobedient  to
the  Grand  Master's  orders,  and  after  proper  admonitions  should  persist  in  his
rebellion,  he  shall  forfeit  all  his  claim  to  the  rights,  benefits,  and  privileges  of  a
true  and  faithful  brother,  etc. ;  concluding  with  Amen.    So  mote  it  be."
POEM  ON  THE  CONSTITUTIONS  OP  MASONRY.
Translated  by  James  Orchard  Halliwell,  Esq.,  F.R.S.,  Hon.  M.E.I.A.,  P.S.  A.,
M.E.S.N.A.,  etc.,  (written  during  the  fourteenth  century.)
This  poem  on  the  Constitutions  of  Freemasonry  is  taken  from  a  very  small
quarto  manuscript  on  vellum,  written  not  later  than  the  latter  part  of  the  four-
teenth century,  preserved  in  the  Old  Royal  Library  at  the  British  Museum.
(Bib.  Reg.  17  A,  I.  ff.  32.)  Casley,*  by  some  strange  oversight,  in  the  only
catalogue  we  at  present  possess,  has  entitled  it  "  a  poem  of  moral  duties ;"  and,
although  he  gives  the  Latin  title  correctly,  yet  the  real  contents  of  this  singular
document  were  quite  unknown  until  I  pointed  them  out  in  an  essay  "  On  the
Introduction  of  Freemasonry  into  England,"  read  before  the  Society  of  Anti-
quaries, during  the  session  of  1838-9.  I  believe  I  am  right  in  stating  that  this
is  the  earliest  document  yet  brought  to  light  connected  with  the  progress  of
Freemasonary  in  Great  Britain.  '
Hie  incipiunt  constituoiones  artis  gemetrise  secundum  Euclydem.
Whose  wol  bothe  wel  rede  and  loke,
He  may  fynde  wryte  yn  olde  boke
Of  grete  lordys,  and  eke  ladyysse,
That  hade  mony  chyldryn  y-fere,  y-wisse  ;
And  hade  no  rentys  to  fynde  hem  wyth,
Nowther  yn  towne,  ny  felde,  ny  fryth :
A  cownsel  togeder  they  cowthe  hem  take,
To  ordeyne  for  these  chyldryn  sake,
How  they  my^tn  best  lede  here  lyfe
Withoute  gret  desese,  care,  and  stryfe ;  10
And  most  for  the  multytude  that  was  comynge
Of  here  chyldryn  after  here  ^yndynge.
[They]  sende  thenne  after  grete  clerkys,
To  techyn  hem  thenne  gode  werkys  ;
And  pray  we  hem,  for  our  Lordys  sake,
To  oure  chyldryn  sum  werke  to  make,
That  they  my^th  gete  here  lyvynge  thereby,
Bothe  wel  and  onestlyche,  ful  sycurly.
Yn  that  tyme,  through  good  gemetry,
Thys  onest  craft  of  good  masonry  20
*  The  MS.  formerly  belonged  to  Charles  Theyer,  a  well-known  collector  of  the  seventeenth  century,
and  is  No.  146  in  his  collection,  as  described  in  Bernard's  Catalogus  Manuscriptorum  Angliie,  p.  200,  col.  2.
It  was  probably  from  this  catalogue  that  Casley  took  his  erroneous  description,  his  own  work  being,  for
the  most  part,  very  carefully  executed.

--- Sayfa 30 ---
18  world's  masonic  register.
"Wes  ordeynt  and  made  yn  thys  manere,
Y-cownterfetyd  of  thys  clerkys  y-fere  ;
At  these  lordys  prayers  they  cownterfetyd  gemetry,
And  jaf  hyt  the  name  of  masonry,
For  the  moste  oneste  craft  of  alle.
These  lordys  chyldryn  thereto  dede  falle,
To  lurne  of  hym  the  craft  of  gemetry,
The  wheche  he  made  ful  curysly;
Through  fadrys  prayers  and  modrys  also,
Thys  onest  craft  he  putte  hem  to.  30
He  that  lernede  best,  and  were  of  oneste,
And  passnd  hys  felows  yn  curyste  ;
3ef  yn  that  craft  he  dede  hym  passe,
He  schulde  have  more  worschepe  then  the  lasse.
Thys  grete  clerkys  name  wes  clept  Euclyde,
Hys  name  hyt  spradde  ful  wondur  wyde.
3et  thys  grete  clerke  more  ordeynt  he
To  hym  that  was  herre  yn  thys  degre,
That  he  schulde  teche  the  symplyst  of  [wytte]
Yn  that  onest  craft  to  be  parfytte  ;  40
And  so  uchon  schulle  techyn  othnr,
And  love  togeder  as  syster  and  brothur.
Forthermore  ^et  that  ordeynt  he,
Mayster  y-callud  so  schulde  he  be  ;
So  that  he  were  most  y-worschepede,
Thenne  sculde  he  be  so  y-«lepede  :
But  mason  schulde  never  won  other  calle,
Withynne  the  craft  amongus  hem  alle,
Ny  soget,  ny  servand,  my  dere  brother,
Tha^ht  he  be  not  so  perfyt  as  ys  another ;  50
Uchon  sculle  calle  other  felows  by  cuthe,
For  cause  they  come  of  ladyes  burthe.
On  thys  maner,  thro£  good  wytte  of  gemetry,
Bygan  furst  the  craft  of  masonry :
The  clerk  Euclyde  on  thys  wyse  hyt  fonde,
Thys  craft  of  gemetry  yn  Egypte  londe.
Yn  Egypte  he  taw^hte  hyt  ful  wyde,
Yn  dyvers  londe  on  every  syde ;
Mony  erys  afterwarde,  y  understonde,
3er  that  the  craft  com  ynto  thys  londe.  60
Thys  craft  com  ynto  Englond,  as  y  ^ow  say,
Yn  tyme  of  good  kynge  Adelstonus  day ;
He  made  tho  bothe  halle  and  eke  bowre,
And  hye  templus  of  gret  honowre,
To  sportyn  hym  yn  bothe  day  and  ny^th,
An  to  worschepe  hys  God  with  alle  hys  my^th.
Thys  goode  lorde  loved  thys  craft  ful  wel,
And  purposud  to  strenthyn  hyt  every  del,

--- Sayfa 31 ---
world's  masonic  register.  19
For  dyvers  defawtys  that  yn  the  craft  lie  fonde  ;
He  sende  abonte  ynto  the  londe  70
After  alle  the  masonus  of  the  crafte,
To  come  to-  hym  ful  evene  strajfte,
For  to  amende  these  defautys  alle
By  good  consel,  jef  hyt  mytjth  falle.
A  semble  thenne  he  cowthe  let  make
Of  dyvers  lordis,  yn  here  state,
Dukys,  erlys,  and  barnes  also,
Knyjthys,  sqwyers,  and  mony  mo,
And  the  grete  burges  of  that  syt6,
They  were  ther  alle  yn  here  degrS ;  80
These  were  ther  uchon  algate,
To  ordeyne  for  these  masonus  astate.
Ther  they  sow^ton  by  here  wytte,
How  they  my^thyn  governe  hytte ;
Fyftene  artyculus  they  ther  sowjton,
And  fyftene  poyntys  ther  they  wro^ton.
Hie  incipit  articulus  primus.
The  furste  artycul  of  thys  gemetry  : —
The  mayster  mason  moste  be  ful  securly
Bothe  stedefast,  trusty,  and  trwe,
Hyt  shal  hym  never  thenne  arewe  :  00
And  pay  thy  felows  after  the  coste,
As  vytaylys  goth  thenne,  wel  thou  woste ;
And  pay  them  trwly,  apon  thy  fay,
What  that  they  deserven  may ;
And  to  her  hure  take  no  more,
But  what  that  they  mowe  serve  fore  ;
And  spare,  nowther  for  love  ny  drede,
Of  nowther  partys  to  take  no  mede  ;
Of  lord  ny  felow,  whether  he  be,
Of  hem  thou  take  no  maner  of  fe ;  100'
And  as  a  jugge  stonde  upryjth,
And  thenne  thou  dost  to  bothe  good  ry^th ;
And  trwly  do  thys  whersever  thou  gost,
Thy  worschep,  thy  profyt,  hyt  schal  be  most.
Articulus  secundus.
The  seevmde  artycul  of  good  masonry,
As  je  mowe  hyt  here  hyr  specyaly,
That  every  mayster,  that  ys  a  mason,
Most  ben  at  the  generale  congregacyon,
So  that  he  hyt  resonably  y-tolde
Where  that  the  sembl6  schal  be  holde  ;  110
And  to  that  semble  he  most  nede  gon,
But  he  have  a  resenabul  skwsacyon,

--- Sayfa 32 ---
20  world's  masonic  register.
Or  but  he  be  unbuxom  to  that  craft,
Or  with  falssehed  ys  over-raft,
Or  ellus  sekenes  hath  hym  so  stronge,
That  he  may  not  come  hem  amonge;
That  ys  a  skwsacyon,  good  and  abulle,
To  that  semble  withoute  fabulle.
Articulus  tercius.
The  thrydde  artycul  for  sothe  hyt  ysse,
That  the  mayster  take  to  no  prentysse,  120
But  he  have  good  seuerans  to  dwelle
Seven  ^er  with  hym,  as  y  50W  telle,
Hys  craft  to  lurne,  that  ys  profytable ;
Withynne  lasse  he  may  not  ben  able
To  lordys  profyt,  ny  to  his  owne,
As  je  mowe  knowe  by  good  resowne.
Articulus  quartus.
The  fowrthe  artycul  thys  moste  be,
That  the  mayster  hym  wel  be-se,
That  he  no  bondemon  prentys  make,
Ny  for  no  covetyse  do  hym  take ;  130
For  the  lord  that  he  ys  bonde  to,
May  fache  the  prentes  whersever  he  go.
3ef  yn  the  logge*  he  were  y-take,
Muche  desese  hyt  myjth  ther  make,
And  suche  case  hyt  my^th  befalle,
That  hyt  my^th  greve  summe  or  alle.
For  alle  the  masonus  that  ben  there
Wol  stonde  togedur  hoi  y-fere.
3ef  suche  won  yn  that  craft  schulde  dwelle,
Of  dyvers  desesys  je  myjth  telle  :  140
For  more  jese  thenne,  and  of  honest6,
Take  a  prentes  of  herre  degr6.
By  olde  tyme  wry  ten  y  fynde
That  the  prentes  schulde  be  of  gentyl  kynde ;
And  so  sumtyme  grete  lordys  blod
Toke  thys  gemetry,  that  ys  ful  good.
Articulus  quintus.
The  fyfthe  artycul  ys  swythe  good,
So  that  the  prentes  be  of  lawful  blod ;
The  mayster  schal  not,  for  no  vantage,
Make  no  prentes  that  ys  outrage ;  150
*  It  is  curious  to  observe  that  the  same  term,  lodge,  is  still  in  universal  use  among  tlie  Masons.  See
also  the  third  point  for  the  enjoinment  of  secrecy  at  whatever  was  done  at  the  lodges,  which  exactly
corresponds  with  the  present  custom.

--- Sayfa 33 ---
world's  masonic  register.  21
Hyt  ys  to  mene,  as  ge  niowe  here,
That  he  have  hys  lymes  hole  alle  y-fere ;
To  the  craft  hyt  were  gret  sehame,
To  make  an  halt  mon  and  a  lame,
For  an  unperfyt  mon  of  suche  blod
Schulde  do  the  craft  but  lytul  good.
Thus  je  mowe  knowe  everychon,
The  craft  wolde  have  a  myjhty  mon ;
A  maymed  mon  he  hath  no  my^ht,
3e  mowe  hyt  knowe  long  jer  ny^ht.  160
Artie ulus  sextus.
The  syxte  artycul  je  mowe  not  mysse,
That  the  mayster  do  the  lord  no  pregedysse,
To  take  of  the  lord,  for  hyse  prentyse,
Also  muche  as  hys  felows  don,  yn  alle  vyse.
For  yn  that  craft  they  ben  ful  perfyt,
So  ys  not  he,  ^e  mowe  sen  hyt.
Also  hyt  were  ajeynus  good  reson,
To  take  hys  hure,  as  hys  felows  don.
Thys  same  artycul,  yn  thys  casse,
Juggythe  the  prentes  to  take  lasse  170
Thenne  hys  felows,  that  ben  ful  perfyt.
Yn  dyvers  maters,  conne  qwyte  hyt,
The  mayster  may  his  prentes  so  enforme,
That  hys  hure  may  crese  ful  jurne,
And,  jer  hys  terme  come  to  an  ende,
Hys  hure  may  ful  wel  amende.
Articulus  Septimus.
The  seventhe  artycul  that  ys  now  here,
Ful  wel  wol  telle  ^ow,  alle  y-fere,
That  no  mayster,  for  favour  ny  drede,
Schal  no  thef  nowther  clothe  ny  fede.  180
Theves  he  schal  herberon  never  won,
Ny  hym  that  hath  y-quellude  a  mon,
Ny  thylke  that  hath  a  febul  name,
Lest  hyt  wolde  turne  the  craft  to  sehame.
Articulus  octavus.
The  eghte  artycul  schewet  jow  so,
That  the  mayster  may  hyt  wel  do,
3ef  that  he  have  any  mon  of  crafte,
And  be  not  also  perfyt  as  he  au^te,
He  may  hym  change  sone  anon,
And  take  for  hym  a  perfytur  mon.  190

--- Sayfa 34 ---
200
22  world's  masonic  register.
Suche  a  mon,  throve  rechelaschepe,
Myjth  do  the  craft  schert  worschepe.
Articulus  nonus.
The  nynthe  artycul  schewet  ful  welle,
That  the  mayster  be  both  wyse  and  felle;
That  no  werke  he  undurtake,
But  he  oonne  bothe  hyt  ende  and  make  ;
And  that  hyt  be  to  the  lordes  profyt  also,
And  to  hys  craft,  whersever  he  go  ;
And  that  the  grond  be  wel  y-take,
That  hyt  nowther  fle  ny  grake.
Articulus  decimus.
The  thenthe  artycul  ys  for  to  knowe,
Amonge  the  craft,  to  hye  and  lowe,
Ther  schal  no  mayster  supplante  other,
But  be  togeder  as  systur  and  brother,
Yn  thys  euryus  craft,  alle  and  som,
That  longuth  to  a  maystur  mason.
Ny  he  schal  not  supplante  non  other  mon,
That  hath  y-take  a  werke  hym  uppon,
Yn  peyne  thereof  that  ys  so  stronge,
That  peyseth  no  lasse  thenne  ton  ponge,  210
But  ^ef  that  he  be  gulty  y-fonde,
That  toke  furst  the  werke  on  honde  ;
For  no  mon  yn  masonry
Schal  not  supplante  othur  securly,
But  jef  that  hyt  be  so  y-wrojth,
That  hyt  turne  the  werke  to  no^th ;
Thenne  may  a  mason  that  werk  crave,
To  the  lordes  profyt  hyt  for  to  save ;
_Yn  suche  a  case  but  hyt  do  falle,
Ther  schal  no  mason  medul  withalle.  '-'-0
Forsothe  he  that  begynnyth  the  gronde,
And  he  be  a  mason  goode  and  sonde,
He  hath  hyt  sycurly  yn  hys  mynde
To  brynge  the  werke  to  ful  good  ende.
Articulus  undecimus.
The  eleventhe  artycul  y  telle  the,
That  he  ys  bothe  fayr  and  fre ;
For  he  techyt,  by  hys  myjth,
That  no  mason  schulde  worche  be  nyjth,
But  sef  hyt  be  yn  practesynge  of  wytte,
3ef  that  y  cowthe  amende  hytte.  230

--- Sayfa 35 ---
world's  masonic  register.  23
Articulus  duodecimus.
The  twelfthe  artycul  ys  of  hye  honeste1
To  jevery  mason,  whersever  he  be  ;
He  schal  not  hys  felows  werk  deprave,
3ef  that  he  wol  hys  honeste1  save  ;
With  honest  wordes  he  hyt  comende,
By  the  wytte  that  God  the  dede  sende  ;
But  hyt  amende  by  al  that  thou  may,
Bytwynne  jow  bothe  withoute  nay.
Articulus  xiijus.
The  threttene  artycul,  so  God  me  save,
Ys,  jef  that  the  mayster  a  prentes  have,  240
Enterlyche  thenne  that  he  hym  teche,
And  meserable  poyntes  that  he  hym  reche,
That  he  the  craft  abelyche  may  conne,
Whersever  he  go  undur  the  sonne.
Articulus  xiiijus.
The  fowrtene  artycul,  by  good  reson,
Scheweth  the  mayster  how  he  schal  don  ;
He  schal  no  prentes  to  hym  take,
But  dyvers  curys  he  have  to  make,
That  he  may,  withynne  hys  terme,
Of  hym  dyvers  poyntes  may  lurne.  2.">0
Articulus  quindecimus.
The  fyftene  artycul  maketh  an  ende,
For  to  the  mayster  he  ys  a  frende ;
To  lere  hym  so,  that  for  no  mon,
No  fals  mantenans  he  take  hym  apon,
Ny  maynteine  hys  felows  yn  here  synne,
For  no  good  that  he  myjth  wynne  ;
Ny  no  fals  sware  sofre  hem  to  make,
For  drede  of  here  sowles  sake ;     '
Lest  hyt  wolde  turne  the  craft  to  schame,
And  hymself  to  mechul  blame.  2C0
Plures  Gonstituciones.
At  thys  sembl6  were  poyntes  y-ordeynt  mo,
Of  grete  lordys  and  maystrys  also,
That  whose  wol  conne  thys  craft  and  com  to  astate,
He  most  love  wel  God,  and  holy  churche  algate,
And  hys  mayster  also,  that  he  ys  wyth,
Whersever  he  go,  yn  fylde  or  fryth ;

--- Sayfa 36 ---
24  world's  masonic  register.
And  thy  felows  thou  love  also,
For  that  thy  craft  wol  that  thou  do.
Secundus  punctus.
The  secur.de  poynt,  as  y  sow  say,
That  the  mason  worche  apon  the  werk  day.  270
Also  trwly,  as  he  con  or  may,
To  deserve  hys  huyre  for  the  halyday,
And  trwly  to  labrun  on  hys  dede,
Wei  deserve  to  have  hys  mede.
Tercius  punctus.
The  thrydde  poynt  most  be  severele,
With  the  prentes  knowe  hyt  wele,
Hys  mayster  conwsel  he  kepe  and  close,
And  hys  felows  by  hys  goode  purpose  ;
The  prevystye  of  the  chamber  telle  he  no  mon,
Ny  yn  the  logge  whatsever  they  done ;  280
Whatsever  thou  heryst,  or  syste  hem  do,
Telle  hyt  no  mon,  whersever  thou  go ;
The  conwsel  of  halle,  and  ^eke  of  bowre.
Kepe  hyt  wel  to  gret  honowre,
Lest  hyt  wolde  torne  thyself  to  blame,
And  brynge  the  craft  ynto  gret  schame.
Quartus  punctus.
The  fowrthe  poynt  techyth  us  alse,
That  no  mon  to  hys  craft  be  false  ;
Errour  he  schal  maynteine  none
A^eynus  the  craft,  but  let  hyt  gone  ;  290
Ny  no  pregedysse  he  schal  not  do
To  hys  mayster,  ny  hys  felows  also ;
And  tha^th  the  prentes  be  under  awe,
3et  he  wolde  have  the  same  lawe.
Quintus  punctus.
The  fyfthe  poynte  ys,  withoute  nay,
That  whenne  the  mason  taketh  hys  pay
Of  the  mayster,  y-ordent  to  hym,
Pul  mekely  y-take  so  most  hyt  byn ;
3et  most  the  mayster,  by  good  resone,
Warne  hem  lawfully  byfore  none,  300
3ef  he  nulle  okepye  hem  no  more,
As  he  hath  y-done  ther  byfore ;
A^eynus  thys  ordyr  he  may  not  stryve,
3ef  he  thenke  wel  for  to  thryve.

--- Sayfa 37 ---
world's  masonic  register.  25
Sextus  punctus.
The  syxte  poynt  ys  ful  jef  to  knowe,
Bothe  to  hye  and  eke  to  lowe,
For  suche  case  hyt  myjth  befalle,
Amonge  the  masonus,  surame  or  alle,
Throwghe  envye,  or  dedly  hate,
Ofte  aryseth  ful  gret  debate.  310
Thenne  owyth  the  mason,  jef  that  he  may,
Putte  hem  bothe  undur  a  day ;
But  loveday  ^et  schul  they  make  none,
Tyl  that  the  werke  day  be  elene  a-gone ;
Apon  the  holyday  je  mowe  wel  take
Leyser  y-nowjgh  loveday  to  make,
Lest  that  hyt  wolde  the  werke  day
Latte  here  werke  for  suche  afray ;
To  suche  ende  thenne  that  ^e  hem  drawe,
That  they  stonde  wel  yn  Goddes  lawe.  320
Septimus  punctus.
The  seventhe  poynt  he  may  wel  mene,
Of  wel  longe  lyf  that  God  us  lene,
As-hyt  dyscryeth  wel  opunly,
Thou  schal  not  by  thy  maystres  wyf  ly,
Ny  by  thy  felows,  yn  no  maner  wyse,
'  Lest  the  craft  wolde  the  despyse;
Ny  by  thy  felows  concubyne,
No  more  thou  woldest  he  dede  by  thyne.
The  peyne  thereof  let  lyt  be  ser,
That  he  be  prentes  ful  seven  jer,  330
3ef  he  forfete  yn  eny  of  hem,
So  y-chasted  thenne  most  he  ben ;
Ful  mekele  care  myjth  ther  begynne,
For  suche  a  fowle  dedely  synne.
Octavus  punctus.
The  eghte  poynt,  he  may  be  sure,
3ef  thou  hast  y-taken  any  cure,
Under  thy  mayster  thou  be  trwe,
For  that  poynt  thou  schal  never  arewe ;
A  trwe  medyater  thou  most  nede  be
To  thy  mayster,  and  thy  felows  fre ;  340
Do  trwly  al  .  .  .  .  that  thou  my^th,
To  both  partyes,  and  that  ys  good  ryjth.

--- Sayfa 38 ---
26  world's  masonic  register.
Nonus  punctus.
The  nynthe  poynt  we  schul  hym  calle,
That  he  be  stwarde  of  oure  halle,
3ef  that  je  beD  yn  chamber  y-fere,
Uchon  serve  other,  with  mylde  chere ;
Jentul  felows,  je  moste  hyt  knowe,
For  to  be  stwardus  alle  o  rowe,
Weke  after  weke  withoute  dowte,
Stwardus  to  ben  so  alle  abowte,  330
Lovelyche  to  serven  uchon  othur,
As  thawgh  they  were  syster  and  brother ;
Ther  schal  never  won  on  other  costage
Fre  hymself  to  no  vantage,
But  every  mon  schal  be  lyche  fre
Yn  that  costage,  so  moste  hyt  be ;
Loke  that  thou  pay  wele  every  mon  algate,
That  thou  hast  y-bowjht  any  vytayles  ate,
That  no  cravynge  be  y-mad  to  the,
Ny  to  thy  felows,  yn  no  degrfi,  360
To  mon  or  to  wommon,  whether  he  be,
Pay  hem  wel  and  trwly,  for  that  wol  we ;
Therof  an  thy  felow  trwe  record  thou  take,
For  that  good  pay  as  thou  dost  make,
Lest  hyt  wolde  thy  felowe  schame,
And  brynge  thyself  ynto  gret  blame.
3et  good  acowntes  he  most  make
Of  suche  godes  as  he  hath  y-take,
Of  thy  felows  goodes  that  thou  hast  spende,
Wher,  and  how,  and  to  what  ende ;  370
Suche  acowntes  thou  most  come  to,
Whenne  thy  felows  wollen  that  thou  do.
Decimus  punctus.
The  tenthe  poynt  presentyeth  wel  god  lyf,
To  lyven  withoute  care  and  stryf ;
For  and  the  mason  lyve  amysse,
And  yn  hys  werk  be  false,  y-wysse,
And  throws  suche  a  false  skewysasyon
May  sclawndren  hys  felows  oute  reson,
Thrown  'a'se  sclawnder  of  suche  lame
May  make  the  craft  kachone  blame.  380
3ef  he  do  the  craft  suche  vylany,
Do  hym  no  favour  thenne  securly,
Ny  maynteine  not  hym  yn  wyked  lyf,
Lest  hyt  wolde  turne  to  care  and  stryf;

--- Sayfa 39 ---
world's  masonic  register.  2T
But  jet  hym  je  schul  not  delayme,
But  that  je  schullen  hym  oonstrayne,
For  to  apere  whersevor  je  wylle,
Whar  that  ge  wolen,  lowde  or  stylle ;
To  the  nexte  semble  je  schul  hym  calle,
To  apere  byfore  hys  felows  alle,  390
And  but  jef  he  wyl  byfore  hym  pere,
The  crafte  he  inoste  nede  forswere ;
He  schal  thenne  be  chasted  after  the  lawe
That  was  y-fownded  by  olde  dawe.
Functus  undecimus.
The  eleventhe  poynt  ys  of  good  dyscrecyoun,
As  je  raowe  knowe  by  good  resoun ;
A  mason,  and  he  thys  craft  wel  con,
That  syjth  hys  felow  hewen  on  a  ston,
And  ys  yn  poynt  to  spylle  that  ston,
Amende  hyt  sone,  jef  that  thou  con,  400
And  teche  hym  thenne  hyt  to  amende,
That  the  hole  werke  be  not  y-schende.
And  teche  hym  esely  hyt  to  amende,
With  fayre  wordes,  that  God  the  hath  lende ;
For  hys  sake  that  sytte  above,
"With  swete  wordes  noresche  hym  love.
Punctus  duodecimus.
The  twelthe  poynt  ys  of  gret  ryoltfi,
Ther  as  the  semble  y-holde  schal  be,
Ther  schul  be  maystrys  and  felows  also,
And  other  grete  lordes  mony  mo ;  410
Ther  schal  be  the  scheref  of  that  contrfi,
And  also  the  meyr  of  that  sytfi,
Kny^tes  and  sqwyers  ther  schul  be,'
And  other  aldermen,  as  je  schul  se ;
Suche  ordynance  as  they  maken  there,
They  schul  maynt6  hyt  hoi  y-fere
Ajeynus  that  mon,  whatsever  he  be,
That  longuth  to  the  craft  bothe  fayr  and  fre.
3ef  he  any  stryf  ajeynus  hem  make,
Ynto  here  warde  he  schal  be  take.  420
xiijus  punctus.
The  threntethe  poynt  ys  to  us  ful  luf,
He  schal  swere  never  to  be  no  thef,
Ny  soker  hym  yn  hys  fals  craft,
For  no  good  that  he  hath  byraft,
And  thou  mo  we  hyt  knowe  or  syn,
Nowther  for  hys  good,  ny  for  hys  kyn.
3

--- Sayfa 40 ---
2S  world's  masonic  register.
xiiiju*  punctus.
The  fowrtethe  poynt  ys  ful  good  lawe
To  hym  that  wold  ben  under  awe ;
A  good  trwe  othe  he  most  ther  swere
To  hys  mayster  and  hys  felows  that  ben  there ;  430
He  most  be  stedefast  and  trwe  also
To  alle  thys  ordynance,  whersever  he  go,
And  to  hys  lyge  lord  the  kynge,
To  be  trwe  to  hym,  over  alle  thynge.
And  alle  these  poyntes  hyr  before
To  hem  thou  most  nede  be  y-swore,
And  alle  schul  swere  the  same  ogth
Of  the  masonus,  ben  they  luf,  ben  they  loght,
To  all  these  poyntes  hyr  byfore,
That  hath  ben  ordeynt  by  ful  good  lore.  440
And  they  schul  enquere  every  mon
On  his  party,  as  wyl  as  he  con,
3ef  any  mon  mowe  be  y-fownde  gulty
Yn  any  of  these  pointes  spesyaly;
And  whad  he  be,  let  hym  be  sowjht,
And  to  the  sembl6  let  hym  be  browght.
Quindecimus  punctus.
The  fyftethe  poynt  ys  of  ful  good  lore,
For  hem  that  schul  ben  ther  y-swore,
Suche  ordynance  at  the  sembl6  was  layd
Of  grete  lordes  and  maystres  beforesayd ;  450
For  thylke  that  ben  unbuxon,  y-wysse,
Ageynus  the  ordynance  that  there  ysse
Of  these  artyculus,  that  were  y-meved  there,
Of  grete  lordes  and  masonus  al  y-fere.
And  gef  they  ben  y-preved  opunly
Byfore  that  semble,  by  an  by,
And  for  here  gultes  no  mendys  wol  make,
Thenne  most  they  nede  the  craft  forsake;
And  so  masonus  craft  they  schul  refuse,
And  swere  hyt  never  more  for  to  use.  460
But  gef  that  they  wol  mendys  make,
Ajayn  to  the  craft  they  schul  never  take ;
And  jef  that  they  nul  not  do  so,
The  scheref  schal  come  hem  sone  to,
And  putte  here  bodyes  yn  duppe  prison,
For  the  trespasse  that  they  hav  y-don,
And  take  here  goodes  and  here  cattelle
Ynto  the  kynges  hond,  every  delle,
And  lete  hem  dwelle  there  ful  stylle,
Tyl  hyt  be  oure  lege  kynges  wylle.  470

--- Sayfa 41 ---
world's  MASONIC  REGISTER.  29'
Alia  ordinacio  artis  gemetrim.
They  ordent  ther  a  semblfe  to  be  y-holde
Every  ger,  whersever  they  wolde,
To  amende  the  defautes,  jef  any  where  fonde
Amonge  the  craft  withynne  the  londe ;
Uche  jer  or  thrydde  ger  hyt  schuld  be  holde,
Yn  every  place  whersever  they  wolde ;
Tyme  and  place  most  be  ordeynt  also,
Yn  what  place  they  schul  semble  to,
Alle  the  men  of  craft  ther  they  most  ben,
And  other  grete  lordes,  as  ge  mowe  sen,  430
To  mende  the  fautes  that  buth  ther  y-spoke,
3ef  that  eny  of  hem  ben  thenne  y- broke.
Ther  they  schullen  ben  alle  y-swore,
That  longuth  to  thys  craftes  lore,
To  kepe  these  statutes  everychon,
That  ben  y- ordeynt  by  kynge  Adelston ;
These  statutes  that  y  have  hyr  y-fonde
Y  chulle  they  ben  holde  throgh  my  londe,
For  the  worsch6  of  my  rygolt6,
That  y  have  by  my  dygnytfi.  490
Also  at  every  sembl6  that  ge  holde,
That  ge  come  to  gowre  lyge  kyng  bolde,
Byseehyng  hym  of  hys  hye  grace,
To  stonde  with  gow  yn  every  place,
To  conferme  the  statutes  of  kynge  Adelston,
That  he  ordeydnt  to  thys  craft  by  good  reson.
Ars  quatuor  coronatorum.
Pray  we  now  to  God  almyght,
And  to  hys  moder  Mary  bryght,
That  we  mowe  keepe  these  artyculu's  here,
And  these  poynts  wel  al  y-fere,  500
As  dede  these  holy  martyres  fowre,
That  yn  thys  craft  were  of  gret  honoure ;
They  were  as  gode  masonus  as  on  erthe  schul  go,
Gravers  and  ymage-makers  they  were  also,
For  they  were  werkemen  of  the  beste.
The  emperour  hade  to  hem  gret  luste;.
He  wylned  of  hem  a  ymage  to  make,
That  mowgh  be  worscheped  for  his  sake ;
Suche  mawmetys  he  hade  yn  hys  dawe,
To  turne  the  pepul  from  Crystus  lawe.  .">!  0
But  they  were  stedefaste  yn  Crystes  lay,
And  to  here  craft,  withouten  nay ;
They  loved  wel  God  and  alle  hys  lore,
And  weren  yn  hys  serves  ever  more.

--- Sayfa 42 ---
520
30  world's  masonic  register.
Trwe  men  they  were  yn  that  dawe,
And  lyved  wel  y  Goddus  lawe ;
They  thought  no  mawmetys  for  to  make,
For  no  good  that  they  myjth  take,
To  levyn  on  that  mawmetys  for  here  God,
They  nolde  do  so,  thaw^  he  were  wod ;
For  they  nolde  not  forsake  here  trw  fay,
An  byleve  on  hys  falsse  lay.
The  emperour  let  take  hem  sone  anone,
And  putte  hem  ynto  a  dep  presone :
The  sarre  he  penest  hem  yn  that  plase,
The  more  yoye  wes  to  hem  of  Cristus  grace.
Thenne  when  he  sye  no  nother  won,
To  dethe  he  lette  hem  thenne  gon  ;
Whose  wol  of  here  lyf  set  mor  knowe,
By  the  bok  he  may  hyt  schowe,  530
In  the  legent  of  scanctorum,
The  names  of  quatuor  coronatorum.
Here  fest  wol  be,  withoute  nay,
After  Alle  Halwen  the  eyght  day.
3e  mow  here  as  y  do  rede,
That  mony  ^eres  after,  for  gret  drede
That  Noees  flod  was  alle  y-ronne,
The  tower  of  Babyloyne  was  begonne,
Also  playne  werke  of  lyme  and  ston,
As  any  mon  schulde  loke  uppon ;  540
So  long  and  brod  hyt  was  begonne,
Seven  myle  the  he^ghte  schadweth  the  sonne.
Kyng  Nabogodonoser  let  hyt  make,
To  gret  strenthe  for  monus  sake,
Tha^gh  suche  a  flod  ajayne  schulde  come,
Over  the  werke  hyt  schulde  not  nome  ;
For  they  hadde  so  hye  pride,  with  strange  bost,
Alle  that  werke  therfore  wos  y-lost ;
An  angele  smot  hem  so  with  dyveres  speche,
That  never  won  wyste  what  other  schuld  reche.  550
Mony  eres  after,  the  goode  clerk  Euclyde
Ta^ghte  the  craft  of  gemetr6  wonder  wyde,
So  he  dede  that  tyme  other  also,
Of  dyvers  craftes  mony  mo.
Through  hye  grace  of  Crist  yn  heven,
He  commensed  yn  the  syens  seven ;
Gramatica  ys  the  furste  syens  y-wysse,
Diabetica  the  secunde,  so  have  y  blysse,
Rethorica  the  thrydde,  without  nay,
Musica  ys  the  fowrth,  as  y  jow  say,  5G0
Astromia  ys  the  v,  by  my  snowte,
Arsmetica  the  vi,  withoute  dowte,

--- Sayfa 43 ---
world's  masonic  register.  31
Gemetria  the  seventhe  maketh  an  ende,
For  he  ys  bothe  meke  and  hende.
Gramer  forsothe  ys  the  rote,
Whose  wyl  lurne  on  the  boke ;
But  art  passeth  yn  hys  degre\
As  the  fryte  doth  the  rote  of  the  tre ;
Rethoryk  metryth  with  orne  speche  amonge,
And  musyke  hyt  ys  a  swete  songe ;  570
Astronomy  nombreth,  my  dere  brother,
Arsmetyk  scheweth  won  thyng  that  ys  another,
Gemetre'  the  seventhe  syens  hyt  ysse,
That  con  deperte  falshed  from  trewthe  y-wys.
These  ben  the  syens  seven,
Whose  useth  hem  wel,  he  may  han  heven.
Now  dere  chyldren,  by  ^owre  wytte,
Pride  and  covetyse  that  ^e  leven  hytte,
And  taketh  hede  to  goode  dyserecyon,
And  to  good  norter,  whersever  ^e  com.  580
Now  y  pray  £ow  take  good  hede,
For  thys'  je  most  kenne  nede,
But  muche  more  ^e  moste  wyten,
Thenne  ^e  fynden  hyr  y-wryten.
3ef  the  fayle  thereto  wytte,
Pray  to  God  to  sende  the  hytte ;
For  Crist  hymself,  he  techet  ous
That  holy  churche  ys  Goddes  hous,
That  ys  y-mad  for  nothynge  ellus
But  for  to  pray  yn,  as  the  bok  tellus ;  590
Ther  the  pepul  schal  gedur  ynne,
To  pray  and  wepe  for  here  synne.
Loke  thou  come  not  to  churche  late,
For  to  speke  harlotry  by  the  gate ;
Thenne  to  churche  when  thou  dost  fare,
Have  yn  thy  mynde  ever  mare
To  worschepe  thy  Lord  God  bothe  day  and  ny^th,
With  all  thy  wyttes,  and  eke  thy  mygth.
To  the  churche  dore  when  thou  dost  come,
Of  that  holy  water  ther  sum  thow  nome,  600
For  every  drope  thou  felust  ther
Qwenchet  a  venyal  synne,  be  thou  ser.
But  furst  thou  most  do  down  thy  hode,
For  hyse  love  that  dyed  on  the  rode.
Into  the  churche  when  thou  dost  gon,
Pulle  uppe  thy  herte  to  Crist,  anon ;
Uppon  the  rode  thou  loke  uppe  then,
And  knele  down  fayre  on  bothe  thy  knen;
Then  pray  to  hym  so  hyr  to  worche,
After  the  lawe  of  holy  churche,  Bid

--- Sayfa 44 ---
620
32  world's  masonic  register.
For  to  kepe  the  comandementes  ten,
That  God  jaf  to  alle  men ;
And  pray  to  hym  with  mylde  steven
To  kepe  the  from  the  synnes  seven,
That  thou  hyr  mowe,  yn  thy  lyve,
Kepe  the  wel  from  care  and  stryve;
Forthermore  he  grante  the  grace,
In  heven  blysse  to  han  a  place.
In  holy  churche  lef  nyse  wordes
Of  lewed  speche,  and  fowle  wordes,
And  putte  away  alle  vanyte\
And  say  thy  pater  noster  and  thyn  ave;
Loke  also  thou  make  no  bere,
But  ay  to  be  yn  thy  prayere ;
3ef  thou  wolt  not  thyselve  pray,
Latte  non  other  mon  by  no  way.
In  that  place  nowther  sytte  ny  stonde,
But  knele  fayre  down  on  the  gronde,
And,  when  the  Gospel  me  rede  schal,
Fayre  thou  stonde  up  fro  the  wal,  630
And  blesse  the  fayre,  gel  that  thou  conne,
When  gloria  tibi  is  begonne ;
And  when  the  gospel  ys  y-done,
A^ayn  thou  my^th  knele  adown ;
On  bothe  thy  knen  down  thou  falle,
For  hyse  love  that  bow^th  us  alle  ;
And  when  thou  herest  the  belle  rynge
To  that  holy  sakerynge,
Knele  je  most,  bothe  jynge  and  olde,
And  bothe  jor  hondes  fayn  upholde,  640
And  say  thenne  yn  thys  manere,
Fayr  and  softe,  withoute  bere :
"  Jhesu  Lord,  welcom  thou  be,
Yn  forme  of  bred,  as  y  the  se  !
Now  Jhesu,  for  thyn  holy  name,
Schulde  me  from  synne  and  schame ;
Schryff  and  hosel  thou  grant  me  bo,
3er  that  y  schal  hennus  go,
And  very  contrycyon  of  my  synne,
That  y  never,  Lord,  dye  therynne ;  650
And,  as  thou  were  of  a  mayde  y-bore,
Sofre  me  never  to  be  y-lore ;
But  when  y  schal  hennus  wende,
Grante  me  the  blysse  withoute  ende ;
Amen !  amen  !  so  mot  hyt  be !
Now,  swete  lady,  pray  for  me."
Thus  thou  my^ht  say,  or  sum  other  thynge,
When  thou  knelust  at  the  sakerynge.

--- Sayfa 45 ---
world's  masonic  register.  33
For  covetyse  after  good,  spare  thou  nought
To  worschepe  hym  that  alle  hath  wroght ;  660
For  glad  may  a  mon  that  day  ben,
That  onus  yn  the  day  may  hym  sen ;
Hyt  ys  so  muche  worthe,  withoute  nay,
The  vertu  therof  no  mon  telle  may;
But  so  meehe  good  doth  that  syht,
As  seynt  Austyn  telluth  ful  ryht,
That  day  thou  syst  Goddus  body,
Thou  schalt  have  these,  ful  securly : —
Mete  and  drynke  at  tny  nede,
Non  that  day  schal  the  gnede ;  670
Ydul  othes,  and  wordes  bo,
God  for^eveth  the  also ;
Soden  deth,  that  ylke  day,
The  dar  not  drede  by  no  way;
Also  that  day,  y  the  plyht
Thou  schalt  not  lese  thy  eye  syht ;
And  uche  fote  that  thou  gost  then,
That  holy  syht  for  to  sen,
They  schul  be  told  to  stoude  yn  stede,
When  thou  hast  therto  gret  nede;  OHI
That  messongere,  the  angele  Gabryelle,
Wol  kepe  hem  to  the  full  welle.
From  thys  mater  now  y  may  passe,
To  telle  mo  medys  of  the  masse :
To  churche  come  ^et,  ^ef  thou  may,
And  here  thy  masse  uche  day ;
3ef  thou  mowe  not  come  to  churche,
Wher  that  thou  doste  worche,
When  thou  herest  to  masse  knylle,
Pray  to  God  with  herte  stylle,  690
To  jeve  the  part  of  that  servyse,
That  yn  churche  ther  don  yse.
Forthermore  ^et,  y  wol  jow  preche
To  ^owre  felows,  hyt  for  to  teehe,
When  thou  eomest  byfore  a  lorde,
Yn  halle,  yn  bowre,  or  at  the  borde,
Hod  or  cappe  that  thou  of  do,
3er  thou  come  hym  allynge  to;
Twyes  or  thryes,  withoute  dowte,
To  that  lord  thou  moste  lowte ;  700
With  thy  ry^th  kne  let  hyt  be  do,
Thyn  owne  worschepe  thou  save  so.
Holde  of  thy  cappe,  and  hod  also,
Tyl  thou  have  leve  hyt  on  to  do.
Al  the  whyle  thou  spekest  with  hym,
Fayre  and  lovelyche  bere  up  thy  chyn ;

--- Sayfa 46 ---
34  world's  masonic  register.
So,  affter  the  norter  of  the  boke,
Yn  hys  face  lovely  thou  loke.
Fot  and  hond,  thou  kepe  ful  stylle
From  clawynge  and  trypynge,  ys  sckylle;  710
From  spyttyng  and  snyftynge  kepe  the  also,
By  privy  avoydans  let  hyt  go.
And  jef  that  thou  be  wyse  and  felle,  ^
Thou  hast  gret  nede  to  governe  the  welle.
Ynto  the  halle  when  thou  dost  wende,
Amonges  the  genteles,  good  and  hende,
Presume  not  to  hye  for  nothynge,
For  thyn  hye  blod,  ny  thy  comynge,
Nowther  to  sytte,  ny  to  lene,
That  ys  norther  good  and  clene.  720
Let  not  thy  cowntenans  therfore  abate,
Forsothe,  good  norter  wol  save  thy  state.
Fader  and  moder,  whatsever  they  be,
"Wei  ys  the  ehyld  that  wel  may  the,
Yn  halle,  yn  chamber,  whe'r  thou  dost  gon,  «
Gode  maneres  maken  a  mon.
To  the  nexte  degr6  loke  wysly,
To  do  hem  reverans  by  and  by ;
Do  hem  jet  no  reverans  al  o-rowe,
But  jef  that  thou  do  hem  knowe.  730
To  the  mete  when  thou  art  y-sette,
Fayre  and  onestelyche  thou  ete  hytte ;
Fyrst  loke  that  thyn  honden  be  clene,
And  that  thy  knyf  be  scharpe  and  kene ;
And  kette  thy  bred  al  at  thy  mete,
By^th  as  hyt  may  be  ther  y-ete.
3ef  thou  sytte  by  a  worthyour  mon,
Then  thy  selven  thou  art  won,
Sofre  hym  fyrst  to  toyche  the  mete,
3er  thyself  to  hyt  reche.  740
To  the  fayrest  mossel  thou  my^ht  not  strike,
Thaght  that  thou  do  hyt  wel  lyke  ;
Kepe  thyn  hondes,  fayr  and  wel,
From  fowle  smogynge  of  thy  towel ;
Theron  thou  schalt  not  thy  nese  snyte,
Ny  at  the  mete  thy.tothe  thou  pyke;
To  depe  yn  the  coppe  thou  my^ght  not  synke,
Thagh  thou  have  good  wyl  to  drinke,
Lest  thyn  enyn  wolde  wattryn  therby —
Then  were  hyt  no  curtesy.  750
Loke  yn  thy  mowth  ther  be  no  mete,
When  thou  begynnyst  to  drynke  or  speke.
When  thou  syst  any  mon  drynkynge,
That  taket  hed  to  thy  carpynge,

--- Sayfa 47 ---
woeld's  masonic  register.  35
Sone  anonn  thou  sese  thy  tale,
Whether  he  drynke  wyn  other  ale.
Loke  also  thou  scorne  no  mon,
Yn  what  degre  thou  syst  hym  gon  ;
Ny  thou  schalt  no  mon  deprave,
3ef  thou  wolt  thy  worschepe  save ;  760
For  suche  worde  myjht  ther  outberste,
That  my^ht  make  the  sytte  yn  evel  reste.
Close  thy  honde  yn  thy  fyste,
And  kepe  the  wel  fro  "  had-y-wyste."
Yn  chamber,  amonge  the  ladyes  bryght,
Holde  thy  tonge  and  spende  thy  syght;
Lawje  thou  not  with  no  gret  cry,
Ny«make  no  ragynge  with  rybody.
Play  thou  not  but  with  thy  peres,
Ny  tel  thou  not  al  that  thou  heres ;  770
Dyskever  thou  not  thyn  owne  dede,
For  no  merthe,  ny  for  no  mede ;
With  fayr  speche  thou  myght  have  thy  wylle,
With  hyt  thou  myght  thy  selven  spylle.
When  thou  metyst  a  worthy  mon,
Cappe  and  hod  thou  holle  not  on ;
Yn  churche,  yn  chepyns,  or  yn  the  gate,
Do  hym  revera[n]s  after  hys  state.
3ef  thou  gost  with  a  worthyor  mon
Then  thyselven  thou  art  won,  780
Let  thy  forther  schuld  sewe  hys  backe,
For  that  ys  not  withoute  lacke ;
When  he  doth  speke,  holt  the  stylle,
When  he  hath  don,  sey  for  thy  wylle,
Yn  thy  speche  that  thou  be  felle,
And  what  thou  sayst  avyse  the  welle ;
But  byref  thou  not  hym  hys  tale,
Nowther  at  the  wyn,  ny  at  the  ale.
Cryst  then  of  hys  hye  grace,
3eve  jow  bothe  wytte  and  space,  790
Wels  thys  boke  to  conne  and  rede,
Heven  to  have  for  ^owre  mede !
Amen !  amen  !  so  mot  hyt  be  !
Say  we  so  alle  per  charyte.

--- Sayfa 48 ---
GLOSSARY.
Abelyche,  243,  ably.
Adown,  634,  down.     See  Chaucer,  Cant.
T.,  17054,  wb,ere  it  means  below,  its
more  usual  meaning.
Ageynus,  290,  303,  417,  452,  against.
A-gone,  314,  gone,  past.
Algate,  81,  264,  357,  always,  by  all  means,
everyway.      The    corresponding    Lat.
omnino  in  the  Prompt.  Parv.  scarcely
explains  it.     Omnimodo  is  the  better
explanation.
Alle-halwen,  534,  Allhallows.
Allynge,  698,  totally,  entirely.     See  Flor.
and  Blanch.,  669.
Almyght,  497,  all  powerful.     This  line
often  occurs  in  early  poetry.
Alse,  287,  also.
An,  522,  and.
And,  222,  375,  if.
Apere,  387,  390,  to  appear.
Apon,  93,  254,  270,  315,  upon.
Arewe,  90,  338,  to  repent.
Arsmetyk,  572,  arithmetic.
Astate,  82,  263,  estate,  dignity.
Avoydans,  712,  expulsion.
Avyse,  786,  to  advise,  to  consider.  "Avyse
the  welle"   is   a  common  phrase  in
early  poetry.    See  Ywaine  and  Gawin,
1511.
Barnes,  77,  barons.
Bere,   623,  642,  noise,  cry.     See   Kyng
Alisaunder,  550.
Be-se,  128,  to  see,  to  behold.    A.  S.  be-
seon.     It  here  means  to  take  care.
Bo,  617,  671,  both.
Byraft,  424,  bereaved,  deprived.
Byref,  787,  deprive.
Carpynge,  754,  speech.
Chasted,  393,  chastised.
(36)
Chepyns,  777,  markets.
Chulle,  488,  will.
Clept,  35,  called.
Con,  397,  to  know.
Con,  400,  can.
Conne,  172,  631,  can.
Conwsel,  277,  283,  counsel.
Costage,  353,  356,  cost,  expense.  See  Sir
Amadas,  444 ;  Maundevile's  Travels,
p.  125.  '
Covetyse,  659,  covetousness.
Cownterfetyd,  23,  imitated.
Cowthe,  7,  75,  230,  could,  was  able.  See
Prol.  Cant.  T.,  392;  Maundevile's
Travels,  p.  132.  It  is  more  generally
formed  from  con,  to  know,  than  from
the  other  sense  of  the  verb.  See
above,  the  two  meanings  of  con.
Crese,  174,  to  increase.
Curys,  248,  cares.
Curysly,  28,  curiously.
Curyst6,  32,  curiosity.
Curyus,  205,  curious.
Cuthe,  51,  acquaintance,  relationship.
Dawe,  394,  509,  515,  day.
Defawtys,  69,  defects.
Del,  68,  468,  part.
Delayme,  385,  delay.
Deperte,  574,  divide.
Desese,  10,  134,  inconvenience.  "An-
gustia"  is  the  corresponding  Latin
word  in  the  Prompt.  Parv.
Duppe,  465,  deep.
Dyscryth,  323,  describelh.
Enterlyche,  241,  entirely.
Enyn,  749,  eyes.
Erys,  59,  years.
Everychon,  485,  every  one.
Fache,  132,/eZcA.

--- Sayfa 49 ---
world's  masonic  register.
3t
Fare,  595,  to  go.
Fay,  521,  faith.
Fayre,  631,  well,  fairly.
Felle,  194,  713,  strong.
Fonde,  55,  discovered.
Fre,-226,  noble,  liberal.
Fryte,  568,  fruit.
Fryth,  6,  266,  an  inclosed  wood.  See
Lud.  Cot,  p.  264;  Piers  Ploughman,
pp.  224,  241,  355;  Drayton's  Polyolb.,
xi.  p.  862;  Eobson's  Rom.,  pp.  1,  3.
Fynde,  5,  to  provide  with  food,  clothing,  etc.
We  still  use  the  word, — a  man  is  to
have  so  much  a  week,  and  find  himself.
sjaf,  24,  gave.
3ef,  33,  if.
Jjef,  305,  given.
Gemetry,  19,  etc.,  geometry.
ger,  60,  ere,  before.
gese,  141,  ease.
Gnede,  670,  be  wanting.
Gon,  528,  go.
Grake,  200,  crack.
Gravers,  504,  engravers.
Jjurne,  174,  early.
gyndynge,  12,  ending.
Had-y-wyste,  764,  an  exclamation  of
those  who  repented  of  anything  un-
advisedly performed.  The  expression
addiwissen  is  said  to  be  still  in  use  in
the  North  in  the  same  sense.  See
Brocket's  Glossary,  ed.  1825,  p.  2.
It  is  rather  amusing  to  read  Ash's
explanation  of  this  word,  in  v.  The
expression  is  very  common  in  Eliza-
bethan writers.
Han,  576,  618,  have.
Hem,  5,  them.
Hende,  564,  716,  courteous,  gentle.
Herberen,  181,  harbour,  protect.
Here,  592,  their.
Herre,  38,  142,  higher.
Hosel,  647,  the  Sacrament  of  the  Lord's
Supper.
Hye,  306,  high.
Hyr,  106,  hear.
Hytte,  586,  it.
Kachone,  380,  catch.
Kenne,  582,  to  show.
Kette,  735,  to  cut.
Knen,  608,  knees.
Knygtes,  413,  knights.
Knylle,  689,  to  knell.
Labrun,  273,  to  labour.
Ladyysse,  3,  ladies.
Lame,  397,  often.     This  seems  to  be  a
ramification  of  A.  S.  gelome.
Lasse,  34,  less.
Latte,  318,  626,  hinder.
Lawge,  767,  laugh.
Lay,  511,  522,  law,  religion.
Lende,  404,  given.
Lene,  322,  to  grant,  to  give.
Leyser,  316,  leisure,  opportunity.
Logge,   133,   280,    a  lodge.      In   Kyng
Alisaunder,  4295,  the  word  is  used
for  a  tent.
Loght,  438,  loath.
Longuth,  418,  belongeth.
Loveday,  313,  316,  a  day  appointed  for
the   amicable  settlement   of    differences.
It  corresponds  to  the  Lat.  sequestra  in
the  Prompt.  Parv.     See  Lud.  Cov.,  p.
Ill ;  Cant.  T.,  260 ;  H.  of  Fame,  ii.
187;  Test,  of  Love,  ed.  Urry,  p.  481.
Lovelyche,  351,  706,  lovely.
Lowte,  700,  to  bow,  to  make  obeisance.
Luf,  421,    438,    dear,  willing.     Another
form  of  lef  or  leve.
Luste,  506,  liking.
Lyche,  355,  alike,  equally.
Mawmetys,   509,   517,  519,   idols.     See
Cant.  T.,  iv.  85.
Maynte",  416,  maintain.
Mechul,  260,  much.
Mede,  98,  bride,  reward.
Medys,  684,  rewards.
Mekele,  333,  much.
Mendys,  457,  461,  amends.
Meserable,  242,  measurable.
Metryth,  569,  measureth.
Meyr,  412,  mayor.
Mo,  261,  more.
Moder,  498,  mother.
Monus,  544,  man's.
Most,  477,  must.
Most,  11,  chiefly.
Mot,  655,  may.
Mowe,  315,  499,  may.
Nolde,  520,  521,  would  not.

--- Sayfa 50 ---
38
world's  masonic  register.
Nome,  546,  600,  take.
Norter,  580,  707,  nurture.
Nother,  527,  other,  with  the  negative
particle.
Nowther,  180,  neither.
Nulle,  301,  463,  will  not.
Ny,  6,  nor.
Ogth,  437,  oath.
Okepye,  301,  to  occupy.
Onestlyehe,  18,  honestly.
Ordeynt,  21,  477,  496,  ordained.
Orne,  569,  adorned.
Orowe,  348,  729,  in  a  row.
Other,  756,  or.
Oute,  378,  without.
Outrage,  150,  not  perfect.
Over,  434,  above.
Over-raft,  114,  overtaken.
Penest,  525,  punished,  pained.
Pere,  391,  to  appear.
Peyseth,  210,  weigheth.
Plyht,  675,  promise.
Ponge,  210,  pound.
Poyntys,  86,  divisions.
Pregedysse,  162,  291,  prejudice.
Prevytyse,  279,  privities.
Qwenchet,  602,  quenches.
Qwyte,  172,  requite.
Rechelaschepe,  191,  recklessness.
Bode,  604,  607,  the  Cross.
Bybody,  768,  ribaldry.
Kygoltg,  489,  royalty.
Eyolt^,  407,  royalty.
Sakerynge,  638,  658,  Sacrament.
Sarre,  525,  sorer.
Say,  61,  to  tell.
Schadweth,  542,  shadoweth.
Schert,  192,  short,  little.
Schryff,  647,  confession.
Sokylle,  710,  reason.
Senible',  75,  an  assembly.
Ser,  602,  sure.
Sese,  755,  to  cease.
Seuerans,  121,  assurance.
Sewe,  781,  to  follow.
Skwsaeyon,  112,  377,  an  excuse.
Smogynge,  744,  smudging,  smearing.    The
word  is  still  in  use.
Snyftynge,  711,  snuffling.     This  word  is
still  in  almost  general  use.
Snyte,  745,  to  blow  the  nose.  This  word
is  still  in  use  in  the  North.  Ray  ex-
plains it  "to  wipe."  See  his  "Collec-
tion of  English  Words,"  1674,  p.  44.
So,  148.  This  is  probably  a  mistake  in
the  MS.  for  se.
Soget,  49,  subject.
Soker,  423,  to  succour.
Sowgton,  85,  sought.
Sqwyers,  413,  squires.
Steven,  613,  voice.
Strajjfte,  72,  straight,  directly.
Sware,  257,  oath.
Swythe,  147,  very.
Sycurly,  18,  securely.
Sye,  527,  saw.
Sy^th,  398,  sees.
Syn,  425,  see.
Syste,  281,  seest.
Take,  420,  taken.
Tellus,  590,  tells,  says.
Thawj,  520,  though.
The,  724,  to  thrive,  to  prosper.
Tho,  63,  then.
Thylke,  183,  451,  that.
Trwe,  337,  339,  true.
Trwly,  341,  truly.
Tyl,  470,  as  long  as.
Uche,  475,  each.
Uchon,  41,  each  one.
Unbuxom,  113,  451,  disobedient.
Unperfyt,  155,  imperfect.
Vantage,  149,  354,  profit,  advantage.
Whad,  445,  what.
Whersever,  432,  472,  476,  wheresoever.
Wod,  520,  mad.
Won,  47,  one.
Worsch^,  489,  worship.
Woste,  92,  knowest.
Wrogton,  86,  wrought.
Wryte,  2,  written.
Wylned,  507,  willed.
Wyste,  550,  knew.
Wyten,  583,  know.
Wytte,  53,  knowledge.
Y-bore,  651,  born.
Y-bow^ht,  358,  bought.
Y-broke,  482,  broken.
Y-callud,  44,  called.
Y-chasted,  332,  chastised.

--- Sayfa 51 ---
WORLD'S   MASONIC   REGISTER.
39
Y-olepede,  46,  called,  named.
Y-cownjterfetyd,  22,  imitated.
T-done,  302,  466,  633,  done.
Ydul,  671,  idle.
Y-ete,  736,  eaten.
Y-fere,  4,  together.
Y-fonde,  211,  443,  487,  found.
Y-fownded,  394,  founded.
Y-holde,  408,  471,  holden.
Y-lore,  652,  lost.
Y-mad,  359,  589,  made.
Y-meved,  453,  moved.
Y-now^gh,  316,  enough.
Y-ordeynt,  261,  486,  ordained.
Yoye,  526,  joy.
Y-preved,  455,  proved.
Y-quellude,  182,  killed.
Y-ronne,  537,  run.
Y-schende,  402,  ruined,  destroyed.  The
part.  pas.  shent  occurs  in  the  Merry
Wives  of  Windsor,  i.  4,  which  Mr.
Knight  explains  "  roughly  handled,"
a  very  bad  guess  of  Steevens',  which
Mr.  Knight,  as  usual,  has  appro-
priated to  himself.
Yse,  692,  is.
Y-sette,  731,  set  down.
Y-spoke,  481,  spoken.
Ysse,  119,  573,  is.
Y-swore,  436,  448,  483,  sworn.
Y-take,  133,  208,  298,  368,  taken.
Y-taken,  336,  taken.
Y-tolde,  109,  told.
Y-wisse,  4,  451,  certainly.
Y-worschepede,  45,  reverenced.
Y-wryten,  584,  written.

--- Sayfa 52 ---
MASONIC  REGULATIONS  OF  A.L.  5663.
The  following  regulations,  among  others,  were  made  at  a  General  Assembly,
held  on  the  27th  of  December  5663,  at  which  Henry  Jermyn,  Earl  of  St.  Albans,
was  elected  Grand  Master,  who  appointed  Sir  John  Denham,  Knight,  his  Deputy,
and  Christopher  Wren  and  John  "Webb  his  "Wardens  : —
1.  "  That  no  person,  of  what  degree  soever,  be  made  or  accepted  a  Freemason
unless  in  a  regular  Lodge,  whereof  one  to  be  a  Master  or  a  Warden  in  that
limit  or  division  where  such  Lodge  is  kept,  and  another  to  be  a  Craftsman  in
the  trade  of  Freemasonry.
2.  "  That  no  person  hereafter  shall  be  accepted  a  Freemason  but  such  as  are
of  able  body,  honest  parentage,  good  reputation,  and  an  observer  of  the  laws  of
the  land.
3.  "  That  no  person  hereafter,  who  shall  be  accepted  as  a  Freemason,  shall  be
admitted  into  any  Lodge  or  Assembly,  until  he  has  brought  a  certificate  of  the
time  and  place  of  his  acceptation  from  the  Lodge  that  accepted  him,  unto  the
Master  of  that  limit  or  division  where  such  Lodge  is  kept.  And  the  said
Master  shall  enroll  the  same  in  a  roll  of  parchment  to  be  kept  for  that  purpose,
and  shall  give  an  account  of  all  such  acceptations  at  every  General  Assembly.
4.  "  That  every  person  who  is  now  a  Freemason,  shall  bring  to  the  Master  a
note  of  the  time  of  his  acceptation,  to  the  end  the  same  may  be  enrolled  in  such
priority  of  place  as  the  brother  deserves ;  and  that  the  whole  company  and  fel-
lows may  the  better  know  each  other.
5.  "  That  for  the  future,  the  said  fraternity  of  Freemasons  shall  be  regulated
and  governed  by  one  Grand  Master  and  as  many  Wardens  as  the  said  Society
shall  think  fit  to  appoint  at  every  Annual  General  Assembly.
6.  "  That  no  person  shall  be  accepted  unless  he  be  twenty-one  years  old,  or
more."
CHARGES  READ  AT  INSTALLATION.
The  Lodge  of  Antiquity  in  London  has  in  its  possession  the  manuscript  of
the  following  charges  written  in  the  reign  of  James  the  Second : —
"*****  And  furthermore,  at  divers  assemblies  have  been  put  and  or-
dained divers  crafties,  by  the  best  advise  of  magistrates  and  fellows,  Tunc  unus
ex  senioribus  tenet  librum,  et  illiponent  rnanum  suam  super  librum.
"  Every  man  that  is  a  Mason  take  good  heed  to  these  charges  (wee  pray,)  that
if  any  man  find  himselfe  guilty  of  any  of  these  charges  that  he  may  amend
himselfe  or  principally  for  dread  of  God ;  you  that  be  charged  take  good  heed
(40)

--- Sayfa 53 ---
world's  masonic  register.  41
that  you  keepe  all  these  charges  well ;  for  it  is  a  great  evil  for  a  man  to  for-
swear himselfe  upon  a  book.
"  The  first  charge  is,  That  yee  shall  be  true  men  to  God  and  the  holy  church,
and  to  use  no  error  or  heresie  by  your  understanding  and  by  wise  men's  teach-
ing.   Also,
"  Secondly,  That  yee  shall  be  true  liege  men  to  the  King  of  England,  without
treason  or  any  falsehood,  and  that  yee  know  no  treason  or  treachery,  but  yee
shall  give  knowledge  thereof  to  the  King,  or  to  his  counsell ;  also  yee  shall  be
true  one  to  another,  (that  is  to  say)  every  Mason  of  the  craft  that  is  Mason  al-
lowed, yee  shall  doe  to  him  as  yee  would  be  done  unto  yourselfe.
"  Thirdly,  And  yee  shall  keepe  truely  all  the  counsell  that  ought  to  be  kept  in
the  way  of  Masonhood,  and  all  the  counsell  of  the  Lodge  or  of  the  chamber.
Also,  that  yee  shall  be  no  thiefe,  nor  thieves  to  your  knowledge  free  :  that  yee
shall  be  true  to  the  king,  lord,  or  master  that  yee  serve,  and  truely  to  see  and
worke  for  his  advantage.
<   "  Fourthly,  Yee  shall  call  all  Masons  your  fellows,  or  your  brethren,  and  no
other  names.
"  Fifthly,  Yee  shall  not  take  your  fellow's  wife  in  villany,  nor  deflower  his
daughter  or  servant,  nor  put  him  to  no  disworship.
"  Sixthly,  Yee  shall  truely  pay  for  your  meat,  or  drinke  wheresoever  yee  goe,  to
table  or  bord.  Also,  yee  shall  doe  no  villany  there,  whereby  the  craft  or  science
may  be  slandered.
"  These  be  the  charges  general  to  every  true  Mason,  both  Masters  and  Fel-
lows."
"  Now  will  I  rehearse  other  charges  single  for  Masons  allowed  oraccepted.
"  First,  That  no  Mason  take  on  him  no  lord's  worke,  nor  any  other  man's,  un-
less he  know  himselfe  well  able  to  perform  the  worke,  so  that  the  craft  have  no
slander.
"  Secondly,  Also,  that  no  Master  take  worke,  but  that  he  take  reasonable  pay
for  itt ;  so  that  the  lord  may  be  truely  served,  and  the  master  to  live  honestly,
and  to  pay  his  fellows  truely.  And  that  no  master  or  fellow  supplant  others  of
their  worke,  (that  is  to  say)  that  if  he  hath  taken  a  worke,  or  else  stand  master
of  any  worke,  that  he  shall  not  put  him  out,  unless  he  be  unable  of  cunning  to
make  an  end  of  his  worke.  And  no  master  nor  fellow  shall  take  no  apprintice
for  less  than  seaven  years.  And  that  the  apprintice  be  free-born,  and  of  limbs
whole  as  a  man  ought  to  be,  and  no  bastard.  And  that  no  master  or  fellow
take  no  allowance  to  be  made  Mason  without  the  assent  of  his  fellows,  at  the
least  six  or  seaven.
"  Thirdly,  That  he  that  be  made  be  able  in  all  degrees ;  that  is,  free-born,  of
a  good  kindred,  true,  and  no  bondsman,  and  that  he  have  his  right  limbs  as  a
man  ought  to  have.
"  Fourthly,  That  a  master  take  no  apprintice  without  he  have  occupation  to
occupy  two  or  three  fellows  at  the  least.
"  Fifthly,  That  no  master  or  fellow  put  away  any  lord's  worke  to  taske  that
ought  to  be  journey-worke.
"  Sixthly,  That  every  master  give  pay  to  his  fellows  and  servants  as  they  may
deserve,  soe  that  he  be  not  defamed  with  false  workeing.  And  that  none  slander
another  behind  his  backe,  to  make  him  loose  his  good  name.

--- Sayfa 54 ---
42  world's  masonic  register.
"  Seaventhly,  That  no  fellow  in  the  house  or  abroad  answear  another  ungodly
or  reproveably  without  a  cause.
"  Eighthly,  That  every  Master  Mason  doe  reverence  his  elder ;  and  that  a
Mason  be  no  common  plaier  at  the  cards,  dice,  or  hazard ;  or  at  any  other  nn-
lawful  plaies,  through  the  which  the  science  and  craft  may  be  dishonoured  and
slandered.
"  Ninthly,  That  no  fellow  goe  into  the  town  by  night,  except  he  have  a  fellow
with  him,  who  may  bear  him  record  that  he  was  in  an  honest  place.
"  Tenthly,  That  every  master  and  fellow  shall  come  to  the  Assemblie,  if  itt
be  within  fifty  miles  of  him,  if  he  have  any  warning.  And  if  he  have  trespassed
against  the  craft  to  abide  the  award  of  masters  and  fellows.
"  Eleventhly,  That  every  Master  Mason  and  fellow  that  hath  trespassed  against
the  craft  shall  stand  to  the  correction  of  other  masters  and  fellows  to  make  him
accord ;  and  if  they  cannot  accord,  to  go  to  the  common  law.
"  Twelfthly,  That  a  Master  or  fellow  make  not  a  mould-stone,  square,  nor
rule,  to  no  lowen,  nor  let  no  lowen  worke  within  their  Lodge,  nor  without,  to
mould-stone.
"  Thirteenthly,  That  every  Mason  receive  and  cherish  strange  fellows  when
they  come  over  the  countrie,  and  set  them  on  worke  if  they  will  worke,  as  the
manner  is,  (that  is  to  say)  if  the  Mason  have  any  mould-stone  in  his  place,  he
shall  give  him  a  mould-stone,  and  sett  him  on  worke ;  and  if  he  have  none,  the
Mason  shall  refresh  him  with  money  unto  the  next  Lodge.
"  Eourteenthly,  That  every  Mason  shall  truely  serve  his  master  for  his  pay.
"  Fifteenthly,  That  every  master  shall  truely  make  an  end  of  his  worke,  taske,
or  journey,  whithersoe  it  be.
"  These  be  all  the  charges  and  covenants  that  ought  to  be  read  at  the  install-
ment of  Master,  or  making  of  a  Freemason  or  Freemasons.  The  Almighty
God  of  Jacob,  who  ever  have  you  and  me  in  his  keeping,  bless  us  now  and  ever.
Amen."
The  Charges  of  a  Freemason,  extracted  from  the  ancient  records  of
Lodges  beyond  sea,  and  of  those  in  England,  Scotland,  and  Ire-
land, for  the  use  of  the  lodges  in  London.  To  be  Read  at  the
Making  of  New  Brethren,  or  when  the  Master  shall  order  it.
THE  GENERAL  HEADS,  viz.:
I.  Of  God  and  Religion.
II.  Of  the  Civil  Magistrate,  supreme  and  subordinate.
III.  Of  Lodges.
IV.  Of  Masters,  Wardens,  Fellows,  and  Apprentices.
V.  Of  the  Management  of  the  Craft  in  working.
VI.  Of  Behaviour,  viz.:
1.  In  the  Lodge  while  constituted.
2.  After  the  Lodge  is  over,  and  the  Brethren  not  gone.
3.  When  Brethren  meet  without  strangers,  but  not  in  a  Lodge.
4.  In  the  presence  of  strangers  not  Masons.
5.  At  home,  and  in  the  neighbourhood.
6.  Toward  a  strange  Brother.

--- Sayfa 55 ---
world's  masonic  register.  43
I.    CONCERNING  GOD  AND  EeLIGION.
A  Mason  is  obliged,  by  his  tenure,  to  obey  the  moral  law ;  and  if  he  rightly
understands  the  art,  he  will  never  be  a  stupid  Atheist,  nor  an  irreligious  libertine.
But  though  in  ancient  times  Masons  were  charged  in  every  country  to  be  of  the
religion  of  that  country  or  nation,  whatever  it  was,  yet  it  is  now  thought  more
expedient  only  to  oblige  them  to  that  religion  in  which  all  men  agree,  leaving
their  particular  opinions  to  themselves ;  that  is,  to  be  good  men  and  true,  or
men  of  honour  and  honesty,  by  whatever  denominations  or  persuasions  they  may
be  distinguished ;  whereby  Masonry  becomes  the  centre  of  union,  and  the  means
of  conciliating  true  friendship  among  persons  that  must  have  remained  at  a  per-
petual distance.
II.  Of  the  Civil  Magistrate,  supreme  and  subordinate.
A  Mason  is  a  peaceable  subject  to  the  civil  powers,  wherever  he  resides  or
works,  and  is  never  to  be  concerned  in  plots  and  conspiracies  against  the  peace
and  welfare  of  the  nation,  nor  to  behave  himself  undutifully  to  inferior  magis-
trates ;  for  as  Masonry  hath  been  always  injured  by  war,  bloodshed,  and  confu-
sion, so  ancient  kings  and  princes  have  been  much  disposed  to  encourage  the
Craftsmen,  because  of  their  peaceableness  and  loyalty,  whereby  they  practically
answered  the  cavils  of  their  adversaries,  and  promoted  the  honour  of  the  Fra-
ternity, who  ever  nourished  in  times  of  peace.  So  that  if  a  Brother  should  be
a  rebel  against  the  State,  he  is  not  to  be  countenanced  in  his  rebellion,  however
he  may  be  pitied  as  an  unhappy  man ;  and,  if  convicted  of  no  other  crime,
though  the  loyal  Brotherhood  must  and  ought  to  disown  his  rebellion,  and  give
no  umbrage  or  ground  of  political  jealousy  to  the  government  for  the  time  being,
they  cannot  expel  him  from  the  Lodge,  and  his  relation  to  it  remains  indefeasible.
III.  Of  Lodges.
A  Lodge  is  a  place  where  Masons  assemble  and  work :  hence  that  assembly
or  duly-organized  society  of  Masons  is  called  a  Lodge,  and  every  Brother  ought
to  belong  to  one,  and  to  be  subject  to  its  By-Laws  and  the  General  Regulations.
It  is  either  particular  or  general,  and  will  be  best  understood  by  attending  it,
and  by  the  Begulations  of  the  General  or  Grand  Lodge  hereunto  annexed.  In
ancient  times,  no  Master  or  Fellow  could  be  absent  from  it,  especially  when
warned  to  appear  at  it,  without  incurring  a  severe  censure,  until  it  appeared  to
the  Master  and  "Wardens  that  pure  necessity  hindered  him.
The  persons  admitted  members  of  a  Lodge  must  be  good  and  true  men,  free-
born,  and  of  mature  and  discreet  age,  no  bondmen,  no  women,  no  immoral  or
scandalous  men,  but  of  good  report.
IV.  Of  Masters,  Wardens,  Fellows,  and  Apprentices.
All  preferment  among  Masons  is  grounded  upon  real  worth  and  personal  merit
only ;  that  so  the  Lords  may  be  well  served,'  the  Brethren  not  put  to  shame,  nor
the  royal  Craft  despised ;  therefore  no  Master  or  Warden  is  chosen  by  seniority,
but  for  his  merit.  It  is  impossible  to  describe  these  things  in  writing,  and  every
Brother  must  attend  in  his  place,  and  learn  them  in  a  way  peculiar  to  this  Fra-
4

--- Sayfa 56 ---
44  world's  masonic  register.
ternity :  only  candidates  may  know,  that  no  Master  should  take  an  Apprentice
unless  he  has  sufficient  employment  for  him,  anjl  unless,  he  be  a  perfect  youth,
having  no  maim  or  defect  in  his  body,  that  may  render  him  incapable  of  learn-
ing the  art,  of  serving  his  Master's  lord,  and  of  being  made  a  Brother,  and  then
a  Fellow  Craft  in  due  time,  even  after  he  has  served  such  a  term  of  years  as  the
custom  of  the  country  directs;  and  that  he  should  be  descended  of  honest
parents;  that  so,  when  otherwise  qualified,  he  may  arrive  to  the  honour  of  being
the  "Warden,  and  then  the  Master  of  the  Lodge,  the  Grand  "Warden,  and  at
length  the  Grand  Master  of  all  the  Lodges,  according  to  his  merit.
No  Brother  can  be  a  "Warden  until  he  has  passed  the  part  of  a  Fellow  Craft ;
nor  a  Master  until  he  has  acted  as  a  "Warden,  nor  Grand  "Warden  until  he  has
been  Master  of  a  Lodge,  nor  Grand  Master  unless  he  has  been  a  Fellow  Craft
before  his  election,  who  is  also  to  be  nobly  born,  or  a  gentleman  of  the  best
fashion,  or  some  eminent  scholar,  or  some  curious  architect,  or  other  artist,  de-
scended of  honest  parents,  and  who  is  of  singular  great  merit  in  the  opinion  of
the  Lodges.  And  for  the  better,  and  easier,  and  more  honourable  discharge  of
his  office,  the  Grand  Master  has  a  power  to  choose  his  own  Deputy  Grand  Mas-
ter, who  must  be  then,  or  must  have  been  formerly,  the  Master  of  a  particular
Lodge,  and  has  the  privilege  of  acting  whatever  the  Grand  Master,  his  principal,
should  act,  unless  the  said  principal  be  present,  or  interpose  his  authority  by  a
letter.
These  rulers  and  governors,  supreme  and  subordinate,  of  the  ancient  Lodge,
are  to  be  obeyed  in  their  respective  stations  by  all  the  Brethren,  according  to1  the
old  Charges  and  Begulations,  with  all  humility,  reverence,  love,  and  alacrity.
V.  Op  the  Management  op  the  Craft  in  working.
All  Masons  shall  work  honestly  on  working  days,  that  they  may  live  credit-
ably on  holy  days  ;  and  the  time  appointed  by  the  law  of  the  land,  or  confirmed
by  custom,  shall  be  observed.
The  most  expert  of  the  Fellow  Craftsmen  shall  be  chosen  or  appointed  the
Master,  or  overseer  of  the  lord's  work ;  who  is  to  be  called  Master  by  those
that  work  under  him.  The  Craftsmen  are  to  avoid  all  ill  language,  and  to  call
each  other  by  no  disobliging  name,  but  Brother  or  Fellow ;  and  to  behave  them-
selves courteously  within  and  without  the  Lodge.
The  Master,  knowing  himself  to  be  able  of  cunning,  shall  undertake  the  lord's
work  as  reasonably  as  possible,  and  truly  dispend  his  goods  as  if  they  were  his
own ;  nor  to  give  more  wages  to  any  Brother  or  Apprentice  than  he  really  may
deserve.
Both  the  Master  and  the  Masons  receiving  their  wages  justly,  shall  be  faithful
to  the  lord,  and  honestly  finish  their  worlc,  whether  task  or  journey;  nor  put
the  work  to  task  that  hath  been  accustomed  to  journey.
None  shall  discover  envy  at  the  prosperity  of  a  Brother,  nor  supplant  him,  or
put  him  out  of  his  work,  if  he  be  capable  to  finish  the  same ;  for  no  man  can
finish  another's  work  so  much  to  the  lord's  profit,  unless  he  be  thoroughly
acquainted  with  the  designs  and  draughts  of  him  that  began  it.
"When  a  Fellow  Craftsman  is  chosen  "Warden  of  the  work  under  the  Master,
he  shall  be  true  both  to  Master  and  Fellows,  shall  carefully  oversee  the  work  in
the  Master's  absence  to  the  lord's  profit ;  and  his  Brethren  shall  obey  him.

--- Sayfa 57 ---
world's  masonic  register.  45
All  Masons  employed,  shall  meekly  receive  their  wages  without  murmuring
or  mutiny,  and  not  desert  the  Master  till  the  work  is  finished.
A  younger  Brother  shall  be  instructed  in  working,  to  prevent  spoiling  the
materials  for  want  of  judgment,  and  for  increasing  and  continuing  of  brotherly
love.
All  the  tools  used  in  working  shall  be  approved  by  the  Grand  Lodge.
No  labourer  shall  be  employed  in  the  proper  work  of  Masonry,  nor  shall  Free
Masons  work  with  those  that  are  not  free,  without  an  urgent  necessity ;  nor  shall
they  teach  labourers  and  unaccepted  Masons,  as  they  should  teach  a  Brother  or
Fellow.
VI.  Of  Behaviour,  viz.:
1.  In  the  Lodge  while  constituted.
Tou  are  not  to  hold  private  committees,  or  separate  conversation,  without
leave  from  the  Master,  nor  to  talk  of  anything  impertinent  or  unseemly,  nor
interrupt  the  Master  or  Wardens,  or  any  Brother  speaking  to  the  Master ;  nor
behave  yourself  ludicrously  or  jestingly  while  the  Lodge  is  engaged  in  what  is
serious  and  solemn :  nor  use  any  unbecoming  language  upon  any  pretence  what-
soever ;  but  to  pay  due  reverence  to  your  Master,  "Wardens,  and  Fellows,  and
put  them  to  worship.
If  any  complaint  be  brought,  the  Brother  found  guilty  shall  stand  to  the  award
and  determination  of  the  Lodge,  who  are  the  proper  and  competent  judges  of
all  such  controversies,  (unless  you  carry  it  by  appeal  to  the  Grand  Lodge,)  and
to  whom  they  ought  to  be  referred,  unless  a  lord's  work  be  hindered  the  mean-
while, in  which  case  a  particular  reference  may  be  made ;  but  you  must  never
go  to  law  about  what  concerneth  Masonry,  without  an  absolute  necessity  appa-
rent to  the  Lodge.
2.  Behaviour  after  the  Lodge  is  over,  and  the  Brethren  not  gone.
Tou  may  enjoy  yourselves  with  innocent  mirth,  treating  one  another  according
to  ability,  but  avoiding  all  excess,  or  forcing  any  Brother  to  eat  or  drink  beyond
his  inclination,  or  hindering  him  from  going  when  his  occasions  call  him,  or  doing
or  saying  anything  offensive,  or  that  may  forbid  an  easy  and  free  conversation  ;
for  that  would  blast  our  harmony,  and  defeat  our  laudable  purposes.  Therefore
no  private  piques  or  quarrels  must  be  brought  within  the  door  of  the  Lodge,  far
less  any  quarrels  about  religion,  or  nations,  or  state  policy,  we  being  only,  as
Masons,  of  the  Catholic  religion  above  mentioned  ;  we  are  also  of  all  nations,
tongues,  kindreds,  and  languages,  and  are  resolved  against  all  politics,  as  what
never  yet  conduced  to  the  welfare  of  the  Lodge,  nor  ever  will.  This  Charge
has  been  always  strictly  enjoined  and  observed,  but  especially  ever  since  the
Reformation  in  Britain,  or  the  dissent  and  secession  of  these  nations  from  the
communion  of  Borne.
3.  Behaviour  when  Brethren  meet  without  Strangers,  hut  not  in  a  Lodge
formed.
You  are  to  salute  one  another  in  a  courteous  manner,  as  you  will  be  instructed,
calling  each  other  Brother,  freely  giving  mutual  instruction  as  shall  be  thought
expedient,  without  being  overseen  or  overheard,  and  without  encroaching  upon

--- Sayfa 58 ---
46  -world's  masonic  register.
each  other,  or  derogating  from  that  respect  which  is  due  to  any  Brother,  were
he  not  a  Mason ;  for  though  all  Masons  are  as  Brethren  upon  the  same  level,
yet  Masonry  takes  no  honour  from  a  man  that  he  had  before;  nay,  rather  it
adds  to  his  honour,  especially  if  he  has  deserved  well  of  the  Brotherhood,  who
must  give  honour  to  whom  it  is  due,  and  avoid  ill  manners.
4.  Behaviour  in  Presence  of  Strangers  not  Masons.
You  shall  be  cautious  in  your  words  and  carriage,  that  the  most  penetrating
stranger  shall  not  be  able  to  discover  or  find  out  what  is  not  proper  to  be  inti-
mated ;  and  sometimes  you  shall  divert  a  discourse,  and  manage  it  prudently  for
the  honour  of  the  worshipful  Fraternity.
5.  Behaviour  at  Home,  and  in  your  Neighbourhood.
You  are  to  act  as  becomes  a  moral  and  wise  man ;  particularly,  not  to  let  your
family,  friends,  and  neighbours  know  the  concerns  of  the  Lodge,  etc.,  but  wisely
to  consult  your  own  honour,  and  that  of  the  ancient  Brotherhood,  for  reasons
not  to  be  mentioned  here.  You  must  also  consult  your  health,  by  not  continu-
ing together  too  late,  or  too  long  from  home,  after  Lodge  hours  are  past ;  and
by  avoiding  of  gluttony  or  drunkenness,  that  your  families  be  not  neglected  or
injured,  nor  you  disabled  from  working.
6.  Behaviour  towards  a  strange  Brother.
You  are  cautiously  to  examine  him,  in  such  a  method  as  prudence  shall  direct
you,  that  you  may  not  be  imposed  upon  by  an  ignorant  false  pretender,  whom
you  are  to  reject  with  contempt  and  derision,  and  beware  of  giving  him  any
hints  of  knowledge.
But  if  you  discover  him  to  be  a  true  and  genuine  Brother,  you  are  to  respect
him  accordingly ;  and  if  he  is  in  want,  you  must  relieve  him  if  you  can,  or  else
direct  him  how  he  may  be  relieved :  you  must  employ  him  some  days,  or  else
recommend  him  to  be  employed.  But  you  are  not  charged  to  do  beyond  your
ability,  only  to  prefer  a  poor  Brother,  that  is  a  good  man  and  true,  before  any
other  poor  people  in  the  same  circumstances.
Finally,  all  these  Charges  you  are  to  observe,  and  also  those  that  shall  be
communicated  to  you  in  another  way;  cultivating  brotherly  love,  the  foundation
and  cape-stone,  the  cement  and  glory  of  this  ancient  Fraternity,  avoiding  all
wrangling  and  quarrelling,  all  slander  and  backbiting,  nor  permitting  others  to
slander  any  honest  Brother,  but  defending  his  character,  and  doing  him  all  good
offices,  as  far  as  is  consistent  with  your  honour  and  safety,  and  no  farther.  And
if  any  of  them  do  you  injury,  you  must  apply  to  your  own  or  his  Lodge ;  and  ,
from  thence  you  may  appeal  to  the  Grand  Lodge  at  the  quarterly  communica-
tion, and  from  thence  to  the  annual  Grand  Lodge,  as  has  been  the  ancient  laud-
able conduct  of  our  forefathers  in  every  nation ;  never  taking  a  legal  course  but
when  the  case  cannot  be  otherwise  decided,  and  patiently  listening  to  the  honest
and  friendly  advice  of  Master  and  Fellows,  when  they  would  prevent  your  going
to  law  with  strangers,  or  would  excite  you  to  put  a  speedy  period  to  all  law-suits,
that  so  you  may  mind  the  affair  of  Masonry  with  the  more  alacrity  and  success ;
but  with  respect  to  Brothers  or  Fellows  at  law,  the  Master  and  Brethren  should
kindly  offer  their  mediation,  which  ought  to  be  thankfully  submitted  to  by  the
contending  Brethren ;  and  if  that  submission  is  impracticable,  they  must  how-

--- Sayfa 59 ---
world's  masonic  register.  47
ever  carry  on  their  process,  or  law-suit,  without  wrath  and  rancor,  (not  in  the
common  way,)  saying  or  doing  nothing  which  may  hinder  brotherly  love,  and
good  offices  to  be  renewed  and  continued  ;  that  all  may  see  the  benign  influence
of  Masonry,  as  all  true  Masons  have  done  from  the  beginning  of  the  world,  and
will  do  to  the  end  of  time.    Amen.    So  mote  it  be.
The  preceding  Charges,  commonly  called  Anderson's  Constitution,  were  com-
piled by  James  Anderson,  approved  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  and
ordered  to  be  printed  in  the  first  edition  of  the  Book  of  Constitutions,  on
March  25,  5722.
The  following  were  compiled  by  the  same  James  Anderson,  and  also  approved
by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  and  printed  in  its  second  edition  of  the  Book
of  Constitutions,  25th  January,  5738.
The  Old  Charges  of  the  Free  and  Accepted  Masons,  collected  by  the
Author  from  their  old  Records,  at  the  command  of  the  Grand
Master,  the  present  Duke  of  Montagu.  Approved  by  the  Grand
Lodge,  and  ordered  to  be  printed  in  the  first  edition  of  the  Book  of
Constitutions,  on  25th  March,  1722.
I.  Charge. — Concerning  God  and  Beligion.
A  Mason  is  obliged  by  his  tenure  to  observe  the  Moral  Law,  as  a  true  Noachida ;
and  if  he  rightly  understands  the  Craft,  he  will  never  be  a  stupid  Atheist,  nor
an  irreligious  libertine,  nor  act  against  conscience.
In  ancient  times  the  Christian  Masons  were  charged  to  comply  with  the  Chris-
tian usages  of  each  country  where  they  travelled  or  worked ;  but  Masonry  being
found  in  all  nations,  even  of  divers  religions,  they  are  now  only  charged  to  ad-
here to  that  religion  in  which  all  men  agree,  (leaving  each  Brother  to  his  own
particular  opinions,)  that  is,  to  be  good  men  and  true,  men  of  honour  and  honesty,
by  whatever  names,  religions  or  persuasions,  they  may  be  distinguished :  for
they  all  agree  in  the  three  great  articles  of  Noah,  enough  to  preserve  the  cement
of  the  Lodge.  Thus  Masonry  is  the  centre  of  their  union  and  the  happy  means
of  conciliating  persons  that  otherwise  must  have  remained  at  a  perpetual  dis-
tance.
II.  Charge. — Of  the  Civil  Magistrate,  Supreme  and  Subordinate.
A  Mason  is  a  peaceable  subject,  never  to  be  concerned  in  plots  against  the
State,  nor  disrespectful  to  inferior  Magistrates.  Of  old,  Kings,  Princes,  and
States  encouraged  the  Fraternity  for  their  loyalty,  who  ever  flourished  most  in
times  of  peace.  But  though  a  Brother  is  not  to  be  countenanced  in  his  rebellion
against  the  State,  yet  if  convicted  of  no  other  crime,  his  relation  to  the  Lodge
remains  indefeasible.
III.  Charge. — Concerning  Lodges.
A  Lodge  is  a  place  where  Masons  meet  to  work  in ;  hence  the  Assembly,  or
duly  organized  body  of  Masons,  is  called  a  Lodge ;  just  as  the  word  Church  is
expressive  both  of  the  Congregation  and  of  the  place  of  worship.    Every

--- Sayfa 60 ---
48  world's  masonic  register.
Brother  should  belong  to  some  particular  Lodge,  and  cannot  be  absent  without
incurring  censure,  if  not  necessarily  detained.
The  men  made  Masons  must  be  free-born,  (or  no  bondmen,)  of  mature  age
and  of  good  report,  hale  and  sound,  not  deformed  or  dismembered  at  the  time
of  their  making.    But  no  woman,  no  eunuch.
AVhen  men  of  quality,  eminence,  wealth  and  learning  apply  to  be  made,  they
are  to  be  respectfully  accepted,  after  due  examination :  for  such  often  prove  good
lords  (or  founders)  of  work,  and  will  not  employ  Cowans  when  true  Masons  can
he  had  ;  they  also  make  the  best  officers  of  Lodges  and  the  best  Designers,  to
the  honour  and  strength  of  the  Lodge  ;  nay,  from  among  them  the  Fraternity
can  have  a  noble  Grand  Master.  But  those  Brethren  are  equally  subject  to  the
Charges  and  Regulations,  except  in  what  more  immediately  concerns  operative
Masons.
IV.  Charge. — Of  Masters,  Wardens,  Fellows  and  Prentices.
All  preferment  among  Masons  is  grounded  upon  real  worth  and  personal
merit  only,  not  upon  seniority.  No  Master  should  take  a  Prentice  that  is  not
the  son  of  honest  parents,  a  perfect  youth  without  maim  or  defect  in  his  body,
and  capable  of  learning  the  mysteries  of  the  Art ;  that  so  the  lords  (or  founders)
may  be  well  served  and  the  Craft  not  despised  ;  and  that,  when  of  age  and  ex-
pert, he  may  become  an  Entered  Prentice,  or  a  Freemason  of  the  lowest  degree,
and  upon  his  due  improvements  a  Fellow  Craft  and  a  Master  Mason,  capable  to
undertake  a  lord's  work.
The  Wardens  are  chosen  from  among  the  Master  Masons,  and  no  Brother
can  be  a  Master  of  a  Lodge  till  he  has  acted  as  Warden  somewhere,  except  in
extraordinary  cases,  or  when  a  Lodge  is  to  be  formed  where  none  such  can  be
had  ;  for  then  three  Master  Masons,  though  never  Masters  or  Wardens  of  Lodges
before,  may  be  constituted  Master  and  Wardens  of  that  new  Lodge.  But  no
number  without  three  Master  Masons  can  form  a  Lodge  ;  and  none  can  be  the
Grand  Master  or  a  Grand  Warden  who  has  not  acted  as  the  Master  of  a  parti-
cular Lodge.
"V.  Charge. — Of  the  Management  of  the  Craft  in  Working.
All  Masons  should  work  hard  and  honestly  on  working  days,  that  they  may
live  reputably  on  holy  days ;  and  the  working-hours  appointed  by  law  or  con-
firmed by  custom  shall  be  observed.
A  Master  Mason  only  must  be  the  Surveyor  or  Master  of  Work,  who  shall
undertake  the  lord's  work  reasonably,  shall  truly  dispend  his  goods  as  if  they
were  his  own,  and  shall  not  give  more  wages  than  just  to  any  Fellow  or  Prentice.
The  Wardens  shall  be  true  both  to  Master  and  Fellows,  taking  care  of  all
things,  both  within  and  without  the  Lodge,  especially  in  the  Master's  absence;
and  their  Brethren  shall  obey  them.
The  Master  and  the  Masons  shall  faithfully  finish  the  lord's  work,  whether
task  or  journey ;  nor  shall  take  the  work  at  task  which  hath  been  accustomed
to  journey.
None  shall  show  envy  at  a  Brother's  prosperity,  nor  supplant  him  or  put  him
out  of  his  work,  if  capable  to  finish  it.
All  Masons  shall  meekly  receive  their  wages  without  murmuring  or  mutiny,

--- Sayfa 61 ---
world's  masonic  eegistee.  49
and  not  desert  the  Master  till  the  lord's  work  is  finished ;  they  must  avoid  ill
language,  calling  each  other  Brother  or  Fellow  with  much  courtesy,  both  within
and  without  the  Lodge ;  they  shall  instruct  a  younger  Brother  to  become  bright
and  expert,  that  the  lord's  materials  may  not  be  spoiled.
But  Free  and  Accepted  Masons  shall  not  allow  Cowans  to  work  with  them,
nor  shall  they  be  employed  by  Cowans,  without  an  urgent  necessity;  and  even  in
that  case  they  must  not  teach  Cowans,  but  must  have  a  separate  Communication.
No  labourer  shall  be  employed  in  the  proper  work  of  Freemasons.
VI.  Charge. — Concerning  Mason's  Behaviour.
I.  Behaviour  in  the  Lodge  before  closing.
You  must  not  hold  private  committees  nor  separate  conversation  without
leave  from  the  Master ;  nor  talk  of  anything  impertinent ;  nor  interrupt  the
Master  or  Wardens,  or  any  Brother  speaking  to  the  Chair ;  nor  act  ludicrously
while  the  Lodge  is  engaged  in  what  is  serious  and  solemn ;  but  you  are  to  pay
due  reverence  to  the  Master,  Wardens  and  Fellows,  and  put  them  to  worship.
Every  Brother  found  guilty  of  a  fault  shall  stand  to  the  award  of  the  Lodge,
unless  he  appeals  to  the  Grand  Lodge,  or  unless  a  lord's  work  is  retarded :  for
then  a  particular  reference  may  be  made.
No  private  piques,  no  quarrels  about  nations,  families,  religions  or  politics
must  be  brought  within  the  door  of  the  Lodge  :  for  as  Masons  we  are  of  the
oldest  Catholic  religion  above  hinted,  and  of  all  nations  upon  the  Square,  Level
and  Plumb ;  and  like  our  predecessors  in  all  ages,  we  are  resolved  against  polit-
ical disputes,  as  contrary  to  the  peace  and  welfare  of  the  Lodge.
2.  Behaviour  after  the  Lodge  is  closed  and  the  Brethren  not  gone.
You  may  enjoy  yourselves  with  innocent  mirth,  treating  one  another  accord-
ing to  ability,  but  avoiding  all  excess ;  not  forcing  any  Brother  to  eat  or  drink
beyond  his  own  inclination,  (according  to  the  old  Begulation  of  King  Ahas-
uerus,  page  24,  line  1,)  nor  hindering  him  from  going  home  when  he  pleases  ;
'  for  though  after  Lodge  hours  you  are  like  other  men,  yet  the  blame  of  your  ex-
cess may  be  thrown  upon  the  Fraternity,  though  unjustly.
3.  Behaviour  at  Meeting  without  Strangers,  but  not  in  a  formed  Lodge.
You  are  to  salute  one  another  as  you  have  been  or  shall  be  instructed,  freely
communicating  hints  of  knowledge,  but  without  disclosing  secrets,  unless  to
those  that  have  given  long  proof  of  their  taciturnity  and  honour,  and  without
derogating  from  the  respect  due  to  any  Brother,  were  he  not  a  Mason  :  for
though  all  Brothers  and  Fellows  are  upon  the  Level,  yet  Masonry  divests  no
man  of  the  honour  due  to  him  before  he  was  made  a  Mason,  or  that  shall  be-
come his  due  afterwards ;  nay  rather,  it  adds  to  his  respect,  teaching  us  to  give
honour  to  whom  it  is  due,  especially  to  a  noble  or  eminent  Brother,  whom  we
should  distinguish  from  all  of  his  rank  or  station  and  serve  him  readily,  accord-
ing to  our  ability.
4.  Behaviour  in  presence  of  Strangers  not  Masons.
You  must  be  cautious  in  your  words,  carriage  and  motions,  that  so  the  most
penetrating  stranger  may  not  be  able  to  discover  what  is  not  proper  to  be  inti-

--- Sayfa 62 ---
50  world's  masonic  kegistek.
mated;  and  the  impertinent  or  insnaring  questions  or  ignorant  discourse  of
strangers  must  be  prudently  managed  by  Freemasons.
5.  Behaviour  at  home  and  in  your  neighborhood.
Masons  ought  to  be  moral  men,  as  above  charged ;  consequently  good  hus-
bands, good  parents,  good  sons  and  good  neighbours,  not  staying  too  long  from
home  and  avoiding  all  excess ;  yet  wise  men,  too,  for  certain  reasons  known  to
them.
6.  Behaviour  towards  a  foreign  Brother  or  Stranger.
You  are  cautiously  to  examine  him,  as  prudence  shall  direct  you,  that  you
may  not  be  imposed  upon  by  a  pretender,  whom  you  are  to  reject  with  derision
and  beware  of  giving  him  any  hints.  But  if  you  discover  him  to  be  true  and
faithful,  you  are  to  respect  him  as  a  Brother,  and  if  in  want,  you  are  to  relieve
him  if  you  can,  or  else  direct  him* how  he  may  be  relieved;  you  must  employ
him  if  you  can,  or  else  recommend  him  to  be  employed ;  but  you  are  not  charged
to  do  beyond  ability.
7.  Behaviour  behind  a  Brother's  back  as  well  as  before  his  face.
Free  and  Accepted  Masons  have  been  ever  charged  to  avoid  all  slandering
and  backbiting  of  a  true  and  faithful  Brother,  or  talking  disrespectfully  of  his
person  or  performances,  and  all  malice  or  unjust  resentment ;  nay.  you  must
not  suffer  any  others  to  reproach  an  honest  Brother,  but  shall  defend  his  char-
acter as  far  as  is  consistent  with  honour,  safety,  and  prudence,  though  no  farther.
i
VII.  Charge. — Concerning  Law-suits.
If  a  Brother  do  you  injury,  apply  first  to  your  own  or  his  Lodge ;  and  if  you
are  not  satisfied,  you  may  appeal  to  the  Grand  Lodge ;  but  you  must  never  take
a  legal  course  till  the  cause  cannot  be  otherwise  decided :  for  if  the  affair  is
only  between  Masons  and  about  Masonry,  law-suits  ought  to  be  prevented  by
the  good  advice  of  prudent  Brethren,  who  are  the  best  referees  of  such  differ-
ences.
But  if  that  reference  is  either  impracticable  or  unsuccessful,  and  the  affair
must  be  brought  into  the  courts  of  law  or  equity,  yet  still  you  must  avoid  all
wrath,  malice  and  rancour  in  carrying  on  the  suit,  not  saying  or  doing  anything
that  may  hinder  either  the  continuance  or  the  renewal  of  brotherly  love  and
friendship,  which  is  the  glory  and  cementof  this  ancient  Fraternity ;  that  we
may  show  to  all  the  world  the  benign  influence  of  Masonry,  as  all  wise,  true
and  faithful  Brothers  have  done  from  the  beginning  of  time,  and  will  do  till
Architecture  shall  be  dissolved  in  the  general  conflagration.  Amen.  So  mote
it  be.
All  these  Charges  you  are  to  observe,  and  also  those  that  shall  be  communi-
cated unto  you  in  a  way  that  cannet  be  written.

--- Sayfa 63 ---
ALABAMA.
GRAND  LODGE.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  Alabama  was  organized  June  14th,  5821.  Its  commu-
nications are  Annual,  and  held  in  the  City  of  Montgomery,  commencing  on  the
first  Monday  of  December.  The  Grand  Lodge  consists  of  the  Grand  Officers,
Past  Grand,  and  Past  Deputy  Grand  Masters,  Past  Grand  "Wardens,  Past
Grand  Treasurers,  and  Past  Grand  Secretaries,  and  Masters  and  Wardens  of
its  constituent  Lodges.
The  revenue  of  the  Grand  Lodge  is  derived  from  the  following  sources : —
For  Dispensations  for  new  Lodges
$35  00
For  Charters,  in  addition
35  00
Annual  dues  for  members
00  50
There  were  236  Chartered  Lodges  in  this  jurisdiction  as  per  last  returns,
having  a  total  membership  of  8093.  Amount  of  dues  paid  to  the  Grand  Lodge,
$3892  31.  The  returns  of  the  subordinate  Lodges  show  the  following:  Entered
Apprentices,  398 ;  Fellow  Crafts,  276 ;  Eaised,  1014;  Affiliated,  351 ;  Dimited,
782;  Rejected,  295;  Deaths,  102;  Suspended  for  non-payment  of  dues,  113;
Suspended  for  unmasonic  conduct,  33;  Expelled,  31;  Reinstated,  53.
The  Officers  for  the  year  5860,  are  :
R.  H.  Ervin,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
S.  F.  Hale,  R.  W.  Deputy  Grand  Master.
L.  B.  Thornton,  R.  W.  Senior  Grand  Warden.
S.  D.  Moorbb,  R.  W.  Junior  Grand  "Warden.
Thomas  "Welsh.  R.  W.  Grand  Treasurer.
Daniel  Sayre,  R.  "W.  Grand  Secretary.
J.  H.  Willoughbt,  R.  W.  Grand  Chaplain.
A.  A.  Coleman,  R.  W.  Grand  Orator.
E.  M.  Hastings,  R.  "W.  Grand  Marshal.
George  D.  Norris,  "W.  Senior  Grand  Deacon.
James  B.  Luckie,  W.  Junior  Grand  Deacon.
Matthew  Strenna,         >  (
Joseph  M.  Williams,     i
Thomas  McDougal,  Grand  Tyler.
Grand  Stewards.
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.
No.       Lodge.  Looatkw.  Time  of  Meeting.  Master.
1  Helion,  Huntsville,  Madison.  2d  Friday.  Wm,  Gormly.
3  Alabama,  Claiborne,  Monroe*-  Sat.  at  or  b.  f.  m.       J.  C.  Arthur.
4  Rising  Virtue,      Tuscaloosa.
1st  Saturday.
Jos.  Shelton.
5  Halo,
Cahaba,  Dallas  co.     1st  &  3d  Saturdays.  John  A.  Lodor.

--- Sayfa 64 ---
52
world's  masonic  register.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
6  Moulton,
7  Macon,
8  Farrar,
9  Gilead,
Moulton,  Lawrence.
Grove  Hill,  Clarke.
Ely  ton,  Jefferson  co.
Butler,  Choctaw  co.
10  RoyalWhiteHeartClayton,  Barbour  co
11  Montgomery,        Montgomery.
12  Marion,
14  Florence,
16  Athens,
18  Limestone,
22  St.  Albans,
Suggsville,  Clarke.
Florence.
Athens,  Limestone.
Mooresville.
Linden,  Marengo  co
24  Geo. Washington,  Clinton,  Greene  co.
25  Dale,  Camden,  Wilcox  co.
26  La  Fayette,  Greensboro',  Greene,
27  Selma  Fraternal,  Selma,  Dallas  co.
28  Marengo,
29  Rising  Sun,
31  Autauga,
33  Lowndes,
34  Perry,
36  Washington,
37  Courtland,
39  Wetumpka,
40  Mobile,
41  Livingston,
42  Hiram,
43  Leighton,
44  Gaston,
45  Jackson,
46  Harmony,
47  Warren,
48  Vienna,
49  Demopolis,
50  Union,
51  Jefferson,
52  New  Market,
53  Greening,
54  Amity,
55  Mount  Moriah,
56  Troy,
57  Tuskegee,
59  Benton,
61  Tompkinsville,
62  St.  Johns,
63  Social,
64  Eureka,
65  Liberty,
66  Beacon,
Dayton,  Marengo  co.
Decatur,  Morgan  co.
Autaugaville.
Hayneville.
Marion,  Perry  co.
Tuscumbia.
Courtland.
Wetumpka,  Coosa.
Mobile,  Mobile  co.
Livingston,  Sumter
Jacksonville.
Leighton,  Lawrence.
Warsaw,  Sumter  co.
Carnesville,  Sumter.
Eufaula,  Barbour  co.
Kingston,  Autauga.
Pleasant  Ridge.
Demopolis.
Uniontown,  Perry.
Cedar  Bluff.
New  Market.
Sparta,  Conecuh  co.
Eutaw,  Greene  co.
Pickensville.
Troy,  Pike  co.
Tuskegee,  Macon.
Benton,  Lowndes  co.
Tompkinsville.
Union  Springs.
Enon,  Macon  co.
Greenville,  Butler.
Liberty  Hill,  Dallas
New  Prospect.
67  Hampden  Sidney,Robinson  Spring.
68  Holsey,  Glenville,  Barbour.
2d  Saturday.
Sat.  b.  1st  Monday.
1st  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
.  2d  &  4th  Saturdays,
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
2d  Saturday.
M.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Monday.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
2d  Friday.
3d  Tuesday.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
3d  Saturday.
1st  Tuesday.
Last  Saturday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Tuesday.
1st  Saturday.
Every  Monday.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Monday.
Sat.  b.  1st  Sabbath.
1st  Saturday.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
2d  Friday.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
Sat.  b.  1st  Monday.
1st  Monday.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
2d  Saturday.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
3d  Saturday.
1st  Wednesday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
4th  Saturday.
T.  M.  Boyd.
D.  Daffin.
Sam.  Thompson.
C.  N.  Wilcox.
Charles  Petty.
Danl.  Sayre.
S.  Coale.
Jas.  M.  Stewart.
John  Turrentine.
J.  N.  Martin.
Henry  A.  Woolf.
John  H.  Copp.
R.  H.  Ervin.
Thomas  R.  Ward.
Wm.  S.  Knox.
Thomas  J.  Woolf.
James  S.  Britain.
E.  Stoudenmier.
James  B.  Sellick.
H.  C.  McCall.
F.  Maran.
D.  F.  Cannon.
John  Q.  Loomis.
James  Wilkins.
Ben.  B.  Little.
John  R.  Clark.
G.  E.  Kumpe.
William  Little.
Wm.  T.  Nance.
Hugh  Black.
A.  Sample.
W.  G.  Westmoreland.
L.  B.  McCarty.
Wm.  0.  Hudson.
J.  M.  Clifton.
Geo.  D.  Norris.
Jas.  M.  Burnett.
S.  F.  Hale.
Thad.  C.  Belsher.
John  Key.
David  Clopton.
R.  J.  Dudley.
W.  R.  Horn.
M.  N.  Ely.
C.  H.  Jernigan.
Thos.  H.  Bragg.
A.  J.  Martin.
Benjamin  Travis.
A.  H.  Whetstone.
A.  C  Mitchell.

--- Sayfa 65 ---
ALABAMA.
53
No.
Lodge.
Location.
Time  of  Meetino.
Master.
69  Howard,
70  Central,
71  Tehopeka,
72  Widow's  Son,
73  Acacia,
74  Solomons,
75  Cokerville,
77  lichee,
78  Crozier,
79  Fredonia,
80  Wilcox,
81  St.  Stephens,
82  Bellefonte,
83  Friendship,
84  Erophotic,
85  Summerfield,
86  Cotton  Valley,
88  Meridian  Sun,
89  Prattville,
90  Pfister.
91  Henry,
92  Triana,
93  Sawyer,
94  Philodorian,
95  Danville,
96  Tuckabatchee,
97  Loozahatchee,
98  Fulton,
99  Salem,
100  Bridgeville,
101  Hart  well,
102  Newbern,
103  Benson,
Mobile,  Mobile  co.
Montevallo,  Shelby.
Dadeville.
Snow  Hill,  Dallas.
Lowndesboro'.
La  Fayette.
Midway,  Monroe  co.
Uchee,  Russell  co.
White  Plains.
Fredonia,  Chambers.
AUenton,  Wilcox.
St.  Stephens.
Bellefonte,  Jackson.
Centreville,  Bibb  co.
Bragg's  Store.
Summerfield,  Dallas.
Cotton  Valley.
Pleasant  Hill.
Prattville,  Autauga.
McKinley,  Marengo.
Abbeville,  Henry  co.
Triana,  Madison  co.
Wedowee,  Randolph.
Cusseta,  Chambers.
Danville,  Morgan.
Crawford,  Russell.
Goshen,  Cherokee.
Fulton,  Dallas  co.
Salem,  Russell  co.
Bridgeville,  Pickens.
Oxford,  Calhoun  co.
Newbern,  Greene.
Mechanicsville.
104  Good  Samaritan,Dudleyville.
105  Shiloh,  Hampden,  Marengo,
106  Hermon,
107  Choctaw,
108  Oak  Bowery,
110  Forest  Hill,
111  Sylvan,
112  Dean,
114  Midway,
Sumterville,  Sumter.
Pashmataha.
Oak  Bowery.
Pleasant  Grove.
Fosters,  Tuscaloosa.
Brooklyn,  Conecuh.
Society  Hill,  Macon.
115  Warrior  Stand,  Warrior  Stand.
116  De  Kalb,
117  Perry ville,
118  Russell,
119  Notasulga,
120  Waverly,
Lebanon,  De  Kalb.
Perryville,  Perry  co.
Silver  Run,  Russell.
Notasulga,  Macon.
Waverly,  Chambers.
121  Chunnenuggee,  Chunnenuggee.
122  Coffeeville,  Coffeeville,  Clarke.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
2d  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
4th  Saturday.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
Saturday  after  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
2d  Thursday.
F.b.  &2dW.  a.f.  m.
Friday  b.  f.  m.
2d  Saturday.
4th  Friday.
1st  Saturday.
Friday  b.  f.  m.
3d  Monday.
1st  &  2d  Saturdays.
Friday  b.  f.  m.
Monday  b.  f.  m.
4th  Saturday.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
Last  Saturday.
First  Monday.
Friday  b.  2d  Sat.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
Saturday  b.  3d  Sun.
2d  Saturday.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
2d  Thursday.
1st  Friday.
1st  Monday.
3d  Saturday.
W.  a.  1st  &  3d  Sun.
3d  Saturday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
4th  Saturday.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
2d  Friday.
2d  Saturday.
4th  Saturday.
4th  Saturday.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
1st  Friday.
3d  Saturday.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
4th  Saturday.
4th  Saturday.
P.  J.  Pillans."
Rufus  W.  Cobb.
A.  D.  Sturtevant.
J.  W.  Purifoy.
C.  C.  Howard.
James  W.  Brock.
John  H.  Allen.
John  A.  Greene.
Wm.  Johnstone.
Thos.  J.  Taylor.
J.  G.  Bythewood.
Nelson  Kyle.
E.  H.  Moren.
S.  D.  Mooder.
C.  B.  Moore.
Abel  Tatom.
J.  A.  Wood.
James  M.  Smith.
W.  D.  Modawell.
John  E.  Price.
E.  F.  Beits.
T.  L.  Pitman.
J.  W.  Williams.
J.  J.  Gibson.
Wilson  Williams.
Jas.  M.  Aberson.
A.  F.  G.  Campbell.
D.  W.  Floyd.
Thos.  J.  Clark.
S.  C.  Williams.
B.  F.  Hendon.
G.  Smitherman.
Saml.  C.  Dailey.
G.  Gorin.
Jas.  D.  Thomas.
J.  A.  Gilder.
J.  J.  Havis.
J.  T.  Barnett.
W.  L.  Bealle.
A.  J.  Robinson.
John  U.  Brown.
E.  S.  Prince.
W.  J.  Roberts.
Wm.  S.  Miree.
W.  W.  Pitts.
B.  F.  Johnson.
R.  P.  Lockhart.
J.  R.  Herrin.
John  W.  Bell.

--- Sayfa 66 ---
54
world's  masonic  register.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
123  Havana,
124  Felix,
125  Herudon,
126  Tallapoosa,
127  Bolivar,
128  Ridge  Grove,
131  Torkville,
132  Roanoke,
133  Loachapoka,
134  Wiley,
135  Columbia,
136  Unity,
137  Rockford,
138  Bradford,
139  Chilton,
140  Shelby,
141  Bethel,
142  Baldwin,
144  Daleville,
145  Fraternity,
146  Missouri,
147  Rodgersville,
148  Cold  Water,
149  Chambers,
150  Etam,
151  Bladon  Springs,
152  Mt.  Jefferson,
153  Monroeville,
154  Nixburg,
155  Eastaboga,
158  Maysville,
161  Penick,
162  Hendrix,
163  F.  Authentic,
164  Chewacklie,
166  Sumter,
168  Mount  Hope,
169  Buena  Vista,
170  Elba,
171  Clopton,
172  Fellowship,
173  And.  Jackson,
175  Ezel,
176  Davie,
177  Orion,
178  Desotoville,
179  Ashland,
180  Mt.  Hilliard,
181  Aberfoil,
Havana,  Greene  co.  1st  Wednesday.
Midway,  Barbour.     2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
Union,  Greene  co.      2d  Saturday.
Rawlsville.  1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
Stevenson,  Jackson.  1st  &  3d  Fridays.
Ridge  Grove,  Macon.  4th  Saturday.
Torkville,  Pickens.    1st  Saturday.
Roanoke,  Randolph.  2d  &  4th  Thursdays.
Loachapoka,  Macon.  2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
Farriorville,  Pike  co.lst  &  3d  Saturdays.
Columbia,  Henry  co.  1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
L.  Peach  Tree.  4th  Saturday.
Rockford,  Coosa  co.  Sat.  b.  2d  Sunday.
Bradford,  Coosa  co.  1st  Saturday.
La  Place,  Macon  co.  1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
Columbiana,  Shelby.  Last  Friday.
Arbacoochee.  1st  Thursday.
Stockton,  Baldwin.    2d  Saturday.
Daleville,  Dale  co.     1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
Blountsville,  Blount.  1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
Perote,  Pike  co.  3d  Saturday.
Rodgersville.  2d  Monday.
Green  Pond.  1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
Milltown,  Chambers.  1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
Hamburg,  Perry  co.  Saturday  after  f.  m.
Bladon,  Choctaw  co.  1st  Thursday.
Rough  and  Ready.  1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
Monroeville,  Monroe.  Sat.  b.  4th  Sunday.
Nixburg,  Coosa  co.    Sat.  b.  1st  Sunday.
Eastaboga.
Maysville,  Madison.
Central  Institute.
Dublin,  Perry  co.
Fayette  ville.
3d  Friday.
Friday  b.  full  moon
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
4th  Saturday.
4th  Saturday.
Whittenville,  Russell.lst  &  3d  Saturdays.
Gaston,  Sumter  co.    3d  Saturday.
Mt.  Hope,  Lawrence.  Sat.  b.  4th  Sunday.
Magnolia,  Macon  co.  3d  Saturday.
Elba,  Coffee  co.  1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
Barnes  s*J  Roads.        2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
Reform,  Pickens  co.  4th  Saturday.
Montgomery.  1st  &  3d  Tuesday.
Olustee.  3d  Saturday.
Indian  Creek,  Pike.   2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
Orion,  Pike  co.  2d  &  4th  Saturdays,
Desotoville,  Choctaw. 3d  Saturday.
Mt.  Sterling.  2d  Saturday.
Mt.  Hilliard,  Pike  co.  2d  &  4th  Saturdays
Aberfoil,  Macon,  co.  2d  &  4th  Saturdays
Geo.  H.  Sheldon.
A.  G.  Smith.
E.  H.  Lamb.
E.  L.  Black.
T.  Boyd  Foster.
M.  Bedell.
John  J.  W.  Payne.
Wiley  E.  White.
Myles  J.  Greene.
John  B.  Goldsmith.
N.  F.  Oakley.
W.  R.  Welch.
Isaac  W.  Suttle.
R.  H.  Ware.
Nathan  Crawford.
James  T.  Leeper.
Jeremiah  Smith.
Jas.  M.  Vaughn.
Aug.  Mathews.
J.  W.  Jones.
Jas.  W.  Crossley.
M.  C.  Baldridge.
Mark  Tatum.
Thos.  B.  Leverette.
Chas.  H.  Wood.
Geo.  W.  Hall.
W.  W.  Jamieson.
John  DeLoach.
A.  G.  Holloway.
C.  G.  Cunningham.
Thos.  J.  Taylor.
T.  U.  T.  McCane.
Abner  L.  Stokes.
John  H.  Townsend.
Enoch  Dudley.
A.  E.  Brockway.
John  M.  Clark.
John  F.  Foreman.
Wm.  F.  Beard.
Jas.  M.  Williams.
Robt.  A.  McCord.
E.  M.  Hastings.
M.  W.  Smith*
B.  H.  Brantley.
James  B.  Luckie.
Sim  Walton.
John  W.  Henson.
J.  W.  Hubbard.
Ezekiel  Taylor.

--- Sayfa 67 ---
ALABAMA.
55
Time  op  Meettno.
Masteh.
183  Mulberry,
184  Brundidge,
185  Mount  Eagle,
186  Catawla,
188  Haw  Ridge,
189  Delta,
190  Tombecbee,
191  Brush  Creek,
192  Chattahoochee,
193  High  Log,
195  Opelika,
196  White  Hall,
197  Hillabee,
198  Caledonia,
199  Killigee,
200  Sylaoauga,
201  Helicon,
203  Valley,
Mulberry,  Autauga.  2d  Saturday.  A.  C.  Taylor.
Brundidge,  Pike  co.  1st  &  3d  Saturdays.  Jas.  W.  Andress.
NewSite,Tallapoosa.  4th  Saturday.  W.  A.  Stijicklin.
Ashville,  St.  Clair  co.  Friday  before  f.  m.    W.  A.  Edwards.
Haw  Ridge,  Coffee  co.  1st  &  3d  Saturdays.  Saml.  Rutan.
Riser  Hill,  Choctaw.  2d  Saturday.  Alfred  Yates.
Jefferson,  Marengo.  2d  Saturday.  -W.  L.  Kelly.
Brush  Creek,  Perry.  Saturday  b.  f.  m.       T.  L.  Vaughan.
Berlin,  Chambers  co.  1st  &  3d  Saturdays.  P.  H.  Long.
Greenwood.  1st  Saturday.  Saml.  C.  Rutland.
Opelika,  Jefferson  co.  1st  &  3d  Wednesd'ys.  O.  P.  Jones.
Rawlingsville.  Friday  before  f.  m.    A.  A.  Hughes.
Pinckneyville.  Saturday  b.  f.  m.       M.  G.  Slaughter.
Woodville,  Henry  co.  2d  &  4th  Saturdays.  Nathaniel  Pace.
Killigee,  Tallapoosa.  1st  Saturday.
Sylacauga.  3d  Saturday.
Helicon,  Lowndes  co.  2d  Saturday.
Wacoochee,  Russell.  2d  &  3d  Saturdays.
204  ManningSpring,Manning  Spring.       2d  Saturday.
205  Gainestown,
206  Moscow,
207  Pettusville,
208  Alexandria,
209  Marshall,
210  Ebenezer,
211  York,
212  Putnam,
213  Euclid,
214  Carrollton,
216  Choctaw  Corner,Choctaw  Corner,
217  Spring  Hill,
218  Sam  Dixon,
219  Lineville,
220  Pine  Grove,
221  Tensaw,
222  Western  Star,
223  Sandy  Ridge,
224  Newton,
225  Louisville,
227  James  Penn,
228  Dallas,
229  Lebanon,
230  Bexar,
231  Duck  Spring,
233  Sepulga,
234  Isney,
235  Harpersville,
236  Gadsden,
237  Tallassee,
Wm.  Winslett.
John  Oden.
Duncan  Graham.
Oswell  Albright.
G  H.  B.  Mathews.
Chas.  Shaunfield.
J.  W.  Seizemore.
W.  W.  Phillips.
Gainestown,  Clarke.  1st  Saturday.
Moscow,  Marion  co.  Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Pettusville.  2d  Friday.
Alexandria,Calhoun.  Saturday  b.  3d  Sun.  John  Brock.
Guntersville.  2d  Monday.  Wm.  H.  Wiggs.
Spring  Hill,  Barbour.  2d  &  4th  Saturdays.  John  A.  Walker.
Jasper,  Walker  co.     2d  &4t.hWednesdays.Thos.  M.  Gabbert.
Louina,  Randolph  co.  1st  &  3d  Fridays.       John  D.  Barron.
Fort  Browder.  1st  &  2d  Saturdays.  R.  E.  Brown.
Carrollton,  Pickens.  Sat.  b.  4th  Sunday.   Z.  L.  Nabors.
3d  Saturday.  W.  H.  Abernethy.
Spring  Hill.  4th  Saturday.  Chas.  C.  Garrett.
Centre,  Cherokee  co.  1st  Friday.  S.  K.  McSpadden.
Lineville,  Talladega.  1st  &  3d  Saturdays.  John  T.  Bell.
Pine  Grove,  Pike  co.  1st  &  3d  Saturdays.  John  F.  Rhodes.
Montgomery  Hill.      4th  Saturday.  H.  L.  Harris.
Rosserville,  Sumter.  1st  Saturday.  J.  R.  McElroy.
Sandy  Ridge.  Sat.  b.  2d  Sunday.     A.  P.  McWhorter.
Newton,  Dale  co.        2d  &  4th  Saturdays.  J.  S.  Sappington.
Louisville,  Barbour.  1st  &  3d  Saturdays.  John  D.  McLennan
Clopton,  Dale  co.       1st.  &  3d  Saturdays.  A.  G.  James.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.  Wm.  S.  Lackey.
Warren,  Randolph.
Marion,  Perry  co.  1st  Tuesday.
Bexar,  Marion  co.  3d  Saturday.
Duck  Spring.  2d  Friday.
Starlington,  Butler.   Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Isney,  Choctaw  co.    4th  Saturday.
IIarpersville,Shelby.  3d  Saturday.
Gadsden,  Cherokee.  1st  &  3d  Fridays.
Tallassee, Tallapoosa  4th  Saturday.
T.  D.  Cole.
Simeon  Wooten.
L.  P.  Ward.
James  W.  Page.
John  W.  Ellett.
H.  W.  Burton.
J.  H.  Willoughby.
Sol.  T.  Strickland.

--- Sayfa 68 ---
56
world's  masonic  register.
No.
Loimie.
Time  of  Meeting.
238  Fairmount,
239  Andalusia,
241  Bowen,
242  Coosa,  '
243  Ramah,
244  Dawson,
245  John  Payne,
246  Harrison,
247  Cropwell,
248  Lawrence,
249  Toluca,
250  Amand,
251  Camp  Creek,
252  North  Port,
253  Rose  Hill,
254  Quitman,
255  West  Over,
256  Gaylesville.
257  Ervin,
258  Randolph,
259  Magnolia,
260  Bellville,
261  Talladega,
262  Highland,
263  Western,
264  Walnut  Grove,
265  TJ.  D.  Meredian.
Fairmount.  2d  Saturday.
Andalusia,  Covingtonlst  &  3d  Saturdays.
Whistler,  Mobile  co.  Thursday  after  15th
Buyckville,  Coosa  co.4th  Saturday.
Ramah,Montgomery.2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
Oakey  Streak.Butler.Sat.  b.  2d  &  4th  Sun
Mill  Port,  Fayette.    Sat.  b.  3d  Sunday.
Henderson's  Store.     3d  Saturday.
Cropwell,  SaintClair.4th  Saturday.
Lawrenceville.
Toluca,  Butler  co.
Barbourville.
Salsoda,  Butler  co.
North  Port.
2d  Saturday.
4th  Saturday,  a.m.
1st  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
Rose  Hill,  Covington.2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
East  Georgia,  Butler.2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
South  Butler,  Butler.
James  L.  Steely.
Samuel  Tynes.
John  H.  Myers.
Isaac  C.  Hall.
S.  Walker.
.Toliver  Florence.
Wm.  Owens.
John  A.  Law.
Perry  Turner.
P.  H.  Drake.
D.  A.  White.
W.  E.  Mosely.
A.  N.  Steele.
Micajsh  Harper.
A.  A.  Edgar.
Kansas,  Walker  co.
Randolph,  Bibb  co,
Mobile,  Mobile  co.
Bellville,  Conecuh.
Talladega,  Talladega.
Cahaba  Valley.
Livingston,  Sumter.
Walnut  Grove.
3d  Saturday.
4th  Saturday.
2d  Wednesday.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays
1st  Friday.
1st  Saturday.
4th  Friday.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
David  Manasco.
John  B.  Goff.
Henry  S.  Levert.
Henry  M.  Cook.
Jos.  H.  Johnson.
M.  G.  Fields.
C.  S.  McConnico.
W.  H.  Edwards.
GRAND  CHAPTER.
The  Grand  Chapter  of  Alabama  was  organized  June  2,  5827.  It  holds  its
Annual  Convocation  in  the  City  of  Montgomery;  commencing  on  Tuesday
after  the  first  Monday  in  December.  This  Grand  Chapter  is  subordinate  to
the  General  Grand  Chapter.  At  the  Annual  Convocation  of  the  Grand  Chapter,
in  December,  5859,  there  were  50  subordinate  Chapters,  having  1578  affiliated
Royal  Arch  Masons.    Amount  of  dues  paid  to  Grand  Chapter,  $825  50.
SUBORDI1S rATE  CHAPTERS
No.        Name.
Location.
No.           Name.
Location.
4  Monroe,
Claiborne.
20  Livingston,
Livingston.
5  Eunomia,
Huntsville.
21  Mobile,
Mobile.
6  Cyrus,
Florence.
22  Montgomery,
Montgomery.
9  Clinton,
Athens.
24  Eufaula,
Eufaula.
10  Tuscumbia,
Tuscumbia.
25  Courtland,
Courtland.
11  Phenix,
Greensboro'.
26  Union,
Uniontown.
12  Marion,
Marion.
27  Dayton,
Dayton.
17  Wetumpka,
Wetumpka.
28  St.  John,
Selma.
18  Jamestown,
Warsaw.
30  James  Penn,
Jacksonville.
19  Mount  Moriah,
Clinton.
31  Per.  Friendship, Benton.

--- Sayfa 69 ---
ALABAMA.
57
No.       Name.
Location.
No.
Name.
Location.
32  Fulton,
33  Autauga,
34  Hermon,
35  James  L.  Daniel,
36  Pickensville,
37  Concord,
40  Camden,
41  Washington,
43  Tuskegee,
44  Choctaw,
49  Hope,
50  Sumter,
52  Allenton,
53  TJchee,
54  Tyrian,
Fulton.
Autaugaville.
Union  Springs.
Glennville.
Pickensville.
Lafayette.
Camden.
Summerfield.
Tuskegee.
Butler.
Bridgeville.
Gainesville.
Allenton.
Uchee.
Troy.
55  Suggsville,
56  Zerubbabel,
57  Lebanon,
58  Hartwell,
59  Bladon  Spring,
60  Hiram,
61  Signet,
62  Rockford,
63  Clayton,
64  Central,
65  Russel,
66  Farriorville,
67  Alabama,
68  Cherokee,
69  Lower  P.  Tree,
Suggsville.
Waverly.
Lebanon.
Cahaba.
Bladon.
Braggs.
Society  Hill.
Rockford.
Clayton.
Montevallo.
Stevenson.
Farriorville.
Mobile.     ,
Centre.
Lower  P.  Tree.
GRAND    COUNCIL.
Organized  June,  5827.
This  Grand  CouDcil  holds  its  Annual  Assembly  in  the  City  of  Montgomery,
on  Thursday  after  the  first  Monday  in  December.  It  has  24  subordinate  Councils
under  its  jurisdiction.  Total  number  of  affiliated  Council  Masons,  as  per  report
December,  5859,  was  681.    Amount  of  dues  paid  to  Grand  Council,  $367  50.
No.  NAME.
3  Montgomery,
5  Eureka,
6  Central,
8  Florence,
9  Eufaula,
12  Mobile,
17  Selma,
18  Cnnebrake,
19  Adoniram,
21  Izabud,
22  C.  0.  Foster,
24  Wilcox,
SUBORDINATE   COUNCILS.
Location.
Montgomery.
Huntsville.
Marion.
Florence.
Eufaula.
Mobile.
Selma.
Uniontown.
Jacksonville.
Lafayette.
Claiborne.
Camden.
No.  Name.
26  Greensboro',
27  Tuskegee,
29  Mystic,
30  Allenton,
31  Edinburg,
32  Occidental,
33  Chilton,
37  Cahaba,
38  California,
39  Treka,
40  Sierra  Nevada,
41  Stevenson,
Location.
Greensboro'.
Tuskegee.
Summerfield.
Allenton.
Pickensville.
Gainesville.
Union  Springs.
Cahaba.
San  Francisco,  Cal.
Yreka,  Cal.
Placerville,  Cal.
Stevenson.
GRAND   COMMANDERY.
M.  E.  Benjamin  Brown  French,  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Encampment  of
the  United  States,  in  a  letter  dated  October  27th,  1860,  informs  us  that  he  had
issued  the  necessary  authority  for  the  formation  of  the  Grand  Commandery  of
Alabama,  but  at  that  date  had  received  no  returns  of  its  formation.  The  fol-
lowing were  the  subordinate  Oommanderies  in  Alabama,  under  the  jurisdiction

--- Sayfa 70 ---
58  world's  masonic  register.
of  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the  United  States,  as  per  report  of  the  T.  E.
Grand  Recorder,  at  the  Triennial  Session  at  Chicago,  Illinois,  in  September,
1859.
SUBORDINATE   COMMANDERIES.
No.           Name.                    Locatioh.  No.        Name.  Location.
1  Washington,  Marion.  4  Montgomery,  Montgomery.
2  Mobile,  Mobile.  5  Selma,  Selnoa.
3  Tuscumbia,  Tuscumbia.
SUBSCRIBERS'  NAMES.
ALEXANDKIA.
Prather,  Thomas  J.,  Mechanic.    Secretary  and  Librarian,  Alexandria,  208.
AUTAUGA    CO.
Montgomery,  "Wm.,  Planter.    Prattville,  89.
BUTLEK    CO.
t
Allen,  Dr.  "Wm.  E.     Waverly,  148  ;  Council  at  Anburn.
Cook,  J.  B.,  Planter.     Tolnco,  249.
Cnrtney,  G.  W.,  Teacher.     Tolnco,  249.
Fail,  D.  N.,  Planter.     Eureka,  64.
Fail,  Saml.  W.,  Mechanic.     Toluco,  249.
Grisett,  "W.  J.,  Farmer.     Monroeville,  153.
Howard,  John  W.,  Planter.     Toluco,  249.
Jackson,  Henry  F.,  Planter.     Camp  Creek,  251.
Lockhart,  J.  C,  Planter.     Toluco,  249.
Morris,  Wm.  H.,  Teacher.    W.  M.,  Butler  Springs,  270.
McCoy,  W.  J.  B.  W.,  Mechanic.    Eureka,  64.
Odam,  Jas.  R,  Planter.    Dawson,  344.
Payne,  T.  J.,  Planter.    Eureka,  64 ;  Hayneville  chap.
Boach,  D.  C,  Planter.    Toluco,  249.
Smith,  B.  B.,  Planter.    Eureka,  64.
Waren,  Bev.  John  B.,  Master  Mason.
CAKTHA  GE.
Byane,  W.  J.,  Merchant.     Sylvan,  111.
COVINGTON  CO.
Atkison,  C.  G.,  Planter.    Fair  Mount,  238.
Cook,  James  G.,  Planter.    Toluco,  249.
DALLAS  CO.
Carter,  Jarrett,  Farmer.    Benton,  59.
Hardy,  Miles,  Farmer.    Benton,  59.

--- Sayfa 71 ---
ALABAMA.  59
FOSTERS.
Beebe,  Justin  E.,  M.D.,  Planter  and  Teacher.  P.  M.  Sylvan,  111 ;  Rising
Tirtae,  4 ;  P.  H.  P.,  Tuscaloosa  chap.,  1 ;  Grand  Lecturer  of  Grand  Chap.;
Royal  and  Select  Mason.    K.  T.
Blount,  L.  G.,  Overseer.    Sylvan,  111.
Prince,  Nicholas  "W.,  Planter.    Sylvan,  111.
Renfro,  Rev.  John,  Blacksmith  and  Wheelwright.  Sylvan,  111;  Tuscaloosa
chap.,  1.
Tarrant,  Edward,  Teacher,  Superintendent  of  Common  Schools,  Rising  Vir-
tue, 4.
GRANVILLE,  BUTLER  CO
Bragg,  T.  M.,  Jr.,  Clerk.    Eureka,  64.
Brawner,  C.  C,  Merchant.    Notasulga,  119.
Cook,  Robert  H.,  Planter.    Eureka,  64.
Colvin,  J.  G.,  Planter.     Eureka,  64.
Hollaman,  R.  W.,  Merchant.     Eureka,  64.
Jackson,  S.  D.,  Mechanic.     Eureka,  64.
Jones,  J.  A.,  Merchant.    Notasulga,  119.
Lawrence,  Calvin  J.,  Mechanic.     Eureka,  64.
Leverett,  Simeon,  Speculator.    Eureka,  64.
Pow,  T.  G.,  Dentist.     Eureka,  64.
Pentecost,  L.  M.,  Physician.     Secretary  Eureka,  64.
Parmer,  W.  F.,  Merchant.     Eureka,  64.
Rhodes,  Sanford,  Planter.     Eureka,  64.
Sims,  W.  L.,  Clerk.     Eureka,  64.
MONTGOMERY.
Abraham,  Henry,  Merchant,  Court  Square.     Montgomery,  11.
Blumenthall,  Joseph,  Minister  of  the  Jewish  Congregation.    Montgomery,  11.
Clapp,  C.  A.,  Brickmason.     Montgomery,  11.
Davidson,  James,  Cotton  Broker.    Montgomery  council,  3.
Doolittle,  N.  J.,  Merchant,  Court  Square.  Andrew  Jackson,  173 ;  Grand  chap.
Faber,  Henry,  Merchant,  Court  Square.    Montgomery,  11.
Foster,  W.  C.  C,  Cotton  Broker,  89  and  91,  Commerce  St.    A.  Jackson,  173.
Garrett,  John  B.,  Merchant,  96  Commerce  St.     Montgomery  council,  3.
Hufham,  W.  C,  Merchant,  28  Court  Square.     Master  M?ason.
Hannan,  M.  W.,  General  Commission  Merchant,  Commerce  St.    Montgomery;
Grand  chap.
Harris,  Thos.,  Merchant.    Montgomery,  11.
Lehman,  M.,  Merchant,  Court  Square.     Montgomery,  11.
Lopez,  John  B.,  Merchant,  Commerce  St.    Montgomery,  11.
Middleton,  "Win.  A.,  Merchant.     Court  Square.
Sikes,  S.  S.,  Book-keeper,  etc.,  101  Commerce  St.    Montgomery,  11.
Stewart,  W.  R.,  Clerk,  Court  Square.     Montgomery,  11.
Shields,  John  M.,  Clerk  of  Probate  Court.    Andrew  Jackson,  173.
Uhfelder,  M.,  Merchant,  Court  Square.    Montgomery,  11.
"Weil,  Jacob,  Merchant,  6  Market  St.    Montgomery,  11.
Wjjkinson,  J.  N.,  Commission  Merchant,  Commerce  St.  Andrew  Jackson,  173.
5

--- Sayfa 72 ---
60  world's  masonic  register.
montgomery  co.
Wilson,  Wallia  J.,  Planter.    Bzel,  175.
NEWTON.
Balkcorn,  Josiah,  Fanner.     Newton,  224.
Dew,  Thomas  S.,  Farmer  and  Minister.     Newton,  224.
Gamage,  David  Y.,  Teacher.'    Newton,  224.
Kennedy,  Jesse,  Merchant.     Newton,  224.
Newman,  Robert  E.,  Farmer.    Newton,  224.
FORTH  PORT.
Cain,  Adkin,  Merchant.    North  Port,  252.
Palmer,  Samuel  P.,  Farmer.    North  Port,  252.
Powell,  F.,  M.D.    North  Port,  252.
Thomson,  James  A.,  Planter.    North  Port,  252.
Townsend,  Robert  P.,  Vocal  Music  Teacher.    North  Port,  252.
NOTASTJLGA.
Bayzer,  B.  W.  B., ^Salesman.    Notasnlga,  119.
Weaver,  Rev.  John  0.,  Farmer.    Notasula,  119.
PIKE  CO.
Bonds,  Wm.  B.,  Planter,     Helicon,  201.
Smith,  Isaac  R.,  Planter.     Dawson,  344.
SANDY  KIDGE,  LOWNDES  CO.
McWhorter,  A.  B.,  M.D.    W.  M.,  Sandy  Ridge,  223.
SELMA,  DALLAS  CO.
Allen,  Thos.,  Mechanic.     Fraternal,  27.
Campbell,  Peter,  Machinist  and  Engineer.     Fraternal,  27.
Harrison,  J.  B.  Mechanic.    Fraternal,  27.
Krout,  J.,  Confectioner.    Fraternal,  27 ;  St.  John's  chap.,  31 ;  Selma  coun.,17
Riggs,  John,  Plasterer.    Fraternal,  27.     R.  &  S.  M.
TALLADEGA,  TALLADEGA  CO.
Huston,  William  W.,  Merchant.    Talladega,  261.
Warwich,  Thomas,  Jeweler  and  Watchmaker.  Royal  and  Select  Master,
Union  council,  7.
McGee,  William  S.,  Attorney  at  Law.  Royal  and  Select  Master,  Union
council,  7.
TUSCALOOSA.
Bacon,  S.  H,  Merchant.     Rising  Virtue,  4 ;  Tuscaloosa  chap.,  1.
Baird,  James  Willard,  Livery  Stable.     W.  M.,  Demopolis,  49,  in  5857.
Bealle,  William  L.,  Planter.    W.  M.,  Sylvan,  111;  Tuscaloosa  chap.,  1.
Berry,  Obadiah,  Merchant  Tailor.    Rising  Virtue,  4.

--- Sayfa 73 ---
ALABAMA.  61
Blair,  Eobert,  late  Mayor,  Clothing  Merchant.  "W.  M.,  Eising  Virtue,  4.
Tuscaloosa,  chap.,  1.    E.  &  S.  M.
Boing,  Zed  A.,  Shoemaker.    Eising  Virtue,  4.
Brown,  James,  Carpenter.    Eising  Virtue,  4 :  Tuscaloosa  chap.,  1.
Burns,  John,  Boot  and  Shoe  Maker.    Eising  Virtue,  4  ;  E.  A.  Mason.
Doudle,  James,  Parmer.    Coldwater,  148.
Harris,  John  J.,  Attorney  at  Law.    Eising  Virtue,  4.
Hart,  V.,  Tinner.    Eising  Virtue,  4 ;  Tuscaloosa  chap.,  1.
Hutchinson,  Alfred  H.,  School  Teacher.    Eising  Virtue,  4.
Jacoby,  Henry,  Merchant.    Eising  Virtue,  4.
Kohler,  George,  Clerk.    Eising  Virtue,  4.
Lewis,  Thomas  P.,  Jeweler.    Eising  Virtue,  4 ;  Tuscaloosa  chap.,  1.
Lowenbaum,  S.,  Clerk.    Eising  Virtue,  4.
Powell,  E.  Abner,  Attorney  at  Law.    North  Port,  252.
Purcell,  John,  Cabinet-maker.    Eising  Virtue,  4 ;  Tuscaloosa  chap.,  1 .
Eoberson,  James  H.,  Planter.    Sylvan,  111.
Eoberts,  John  T.,  Clerk  of  the  County  Court.  Eising  Virtue,  4;  Tuscaloosa
chap.,  1.
Smallwood,  Charles,  Tomb-stone  Manufacturer.  Eising  Virtue,  4;  Tusca-
loosa chap.,  1.
Spencer,  J.  C,  Attorney  at  Law.    Eising  Virtue,  4.
■WEST  OF  CHINA  GROVE.
Johnson,  Dr.  John  T.,  Physician.     Mount  Hilliard,  180 ;  Tyrian  chap.,  54.
Townsend,  Saml.  J.,  Parmer.    "Wiley,  134.;  chap.  66.
WOODSTOCK.
James,  Thomas,  Farmer  and  "Wheelwright.    Coldwater,  148.
Bennett,  "William  A.,  Grocer,  Farriorville.  Wiley,  134 ;  Farriorville,  chap.,
66  ;  Chilton  coun.,  33.
Bryan,  Marshall,  Farmer,  Fea  Eiver.    Brundidge,  184.
Forester,  Lewis,  Physician.     Eeform.    Fellowship,  172.
Glenn,  Abram,  Planter,  Carthage.    Sylvan,  111.
Owens,  William  H.,  Farmer,  Buckhorn.  Louisville,  225  ;  Albany  chap.,  15,
Georgia.
Payne,  John  J.  W.,  M.D.,  University  N.  Y.     Yorkville.     Yorkville,  131.
Pullen,  William  0.,  Farmer,  Tallassee.    Notasulga,  119.

--- Sayfa 74 ---
ARKANSAS.
GRAND  LODGE.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  Arkansas  was  organized  February  22d,  5832.  Its
Annual  Communications  are  held  at  Little  Rock,  on  the  first  Monday  of  Novem-
ber. Its  membership  is  composed  of  the  Grand  Officers,  Past  Grand  Officers,
Past  Masters,  and  Masters  and  "Wardens  of  its  subordinate  Lodges.  The
revenue  of  the  Grand  Lodge  is  derived  from  the  following  sources : —
For  Dispensations  for  new  Lodges
$10
For  Charters  for  new  Lodges,  in  addition        ...  15
For  renewal  of  Charters
10
Bach  Lodge,  annually    10
For  every  Degree
1
For  every  Member    1
There  are  155  Chartered  Lodges  and  one  under  dispensation  in  Arkansas,
96  of  which  made  returns,  and  13  that  were  under  dispensation  received  charters.
Number  of  members  returned  at  the  Annual  Communication,  November,  5860,
by  the  subordinate  Lodges,  4113;   and  non-affiliated  in  the  jurisdiction,  380.
Number  initiated  during  the  year,  887 ;  Passed,  707 ;  Raised,  622  ;  Affiliated,  349 ;
Dimitted,  148  ;  Died,  95  ;  Suspended,  103 ;  Expelled,  10.     Amount  of  receipts,
$3043.
The  officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  elected  November,  5860,  are :
E.  H.  English,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
Willis  Somervell,  R.  W.  Senior  Grand  "Warden.
A.  M.  Ward,  R.  W.  Junior  Grand  "Warden.
R.  L.  Dodge,  R.  W.  Grand  Treasurer.
T.  D.  Merrick,  R.  W.  Grand  Secretary.
E.  H.  Whitfield,  R.  W.  Grand  Lecturer.
W.  H.  Sutton,  R.  W.  Grand  Orator.
William  Hammond,  R.  W.  Grand  Tyler.
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.
No  Lodge.
1  Washington,
2  Western  Star,
3  Morning  Star,
4  Mount  Horeb,
5  Liberty,
6  Van  Buren,
7  Key,
8  Golden  Square,
9  Franklin,
(62)
Location.
Fayetteville.
Little  Sock.
Bellville.
Washington.
Mount  Zion  Church.
Van  Buren.
Double  Spring.
Columbia.
Clarksville.
Time  of  Meeting.
1st  Friday.
1st  Monday.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
4th  Saturday.
2d  Monday.
Friday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
4th  Tuesday.
Master.
Wm.  R.  Quarles.
Thomas  Parsel.
A.  B.  Williams.
John  Hill.
A.  Lewis.

--- Sayfa 75 ---
ARKANSAS.
63
Lodge.
Looatiok.
Time  op  Meetiku.
Master.
10  Mount  Zion,
11  Camden,
12  Mount  Carmel,
13  El  Dorado,
14  Lewisville,
15  Woodlawn,
16  Lafayette,
17  Dover,
18  Mount  Moriah,
19  Arkadelphia,
20  Belle  Point,
21  Cherokee,
22  Holly  Springs,
23  Concord,
24  West  Point,
25  Tulip,
26  Polk,
27  Princeton,
28  Hickory  Grove,
29  Smithville,
30  Pleasant  Valley,
31  Pool,
32  Dardenelle,
33  Warren,
34  Benton,
35  Fort  Gibson,
36  Northwestern,
37  White  River,
38  St.  John's,
39  English,
40  Eureka,
41  Danville,
42  Clinton,
43  Oakville,
44  Odeon,
45  Augusta,
46  Lacy,
47  Golden  Rule,
48  Hyperian,
49  Searcy,
50  Calhoun,
51  Brownsville,
52  Choctaw,
53  Southern  Star,
54  Evening  Star,
55  Rome,
56  Bentonville,
57  Cane  Hill,
58  Rockport,
59  Vernon,
Batesville.    Geo.  W.  Dougherty.
Camden.  1st  &  3d  Saturdays.   W.  M.  Leake.
Magnolia.  4th  Saturday.
El  Dorado.    W.  D.  Lee.
Lewisville.    J.  M.  Montgomery.
Woodlawn.  1st  Saturday.  B.  F.  Reddick.
Helena.
Dover.  1st  Saturday.  J.  B.  Shepard.
Lisbon.  2d  Saturday.
Arkadelphia.  1st  Friday.  Jos.  H.  Thomas.
Fort  Smith.  1st.  Thursday.  P.  Y.  Brooks.
Talequah,  C.  N.  1st  Friday.  H.  D.  Reese.
Union  Springs.  2d  Friday.
Eudora.    Wm.  C.  Voung.
West  Point.
Tulip.  1st  Friday.  W.  L.  Somerville.
Hillsboro'.  2d  Saturday.  Alex.  Hill.
Princeton.  2d  Friday.  Wm.  T.  M.  Holmes.
Fountain  Hill.
Smithville.
Nashville.  Saturday  b.  f.  m.       F.  M.  Thomas.
Jacksonport.
Dardenelle.  Saturday  af.  f.  m.      Geo.  W.  Lemoyne.
Warren.  Friday  on  or  b.  f.  m.  W.  Y.  McCammon.
Benton.  3d  Thursday.
Fort  Gibson,  C.  N.
Maysville.  2d  Friday.
Des  Arc.  1st  Friday.  Benj.  Blakeney.
Holly  Springs.  Friday  on  or  b.  f.  m.  John  N.  Scales.
Chambersville.
Monticello.  4th  Thursday.  W.  E.  Owens.
Danville.  Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.       Thos.  W.  Pound.
Bethlehem  Ch.
Oakville.
Huntsville.  Last  Friday.  J.  M.  Johnston.
Augusta.    C.  H.  Mattock.
Lacy.  Saturday  b.  2d  Sun.  P.  Lambert.
Hamburg.  3d  Saturday.
Longview.  4th  Saturday.  Jos.  B.  Scarborough.
Searcy.  1st  Saturday.  N.  M.  Mulholland.
Calhoun.  3d  Saturday.  N.  R.  Macheu.
Brownsville.    J.  C.  Hicks.
Doaksville,  C.  N.        1st  Friday.
Hampton.  1st  Saturday.  N.  S.  Mason.
Norristown.    J.  J.  Morphis.
Rome.
Bentonville.    O.  M.  Young.
Boonsboro'.  Thus,  on  or  b.  f.  m.    James  McColloch.
Rockport.  1st  Saturday.  A.  D.  Hardy.
Mount  Vernon.

--- Sayfa 76 ---
64
world's  masonic  register.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
60
61
62
63
64
65
66
67
68
69
70
71
72
73
74
75
76
77
78
79
80
81
82
83
84
85
86
87
Magnolia,  Little  Bock.
Hamburg,  Hamburg.
Hot  Springs,       Hot  Springs.
StrictObserv'noe  Plumb  Bayou.
Last  Monday.
2d  Saturday.  W.  S.  Lawson,
2d  Saturday.  Isaac  Harrison.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.  Noah  D.  English.
3d  Saturday.  S.  S.  Meek.
  W.  G.  Caloway.
3d  Saturday.  Jas.  F.  Bell.
1st  Saturday.  S.  A.  Lockheart.
  B.  Walker.
  J.  M.  Percival.
  Abel  B.  Clemens.
2d  Wednesday.  John  T.  Adair.
2d  Monday.  T.  J.  Harris.
3d  Friday.
Tues.  preceding  24th.Wm.  J.  Montagu.
  John  M.  Whiteside.
  John  Cook.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.      W.  H.  C.  Reid.
Sat.  b.  1st  Sunday.    James  B.  Milner.
90
91
92
93
94
95
96
97
100
101
102
103
104
105
106
107
108
109
Tell,  Carrollton.
Barber,  Double  Spring
Ashley,  Berryville.
Falcon,  Falcon.
Champagnolle,  Champagnolle.
Pine  Bluff,  Pine  Bluff.
Aberdeen,  Aberdeen.
Bandolph,  Pocahontas.
Powhatan,  Powhatan.
Paraclifta,  Paraclifta.
Flint,  Flint,  C.  N.
Oak  Bluff,  Gainesville.
Mill  Bidge,  Wittsburg.
Mitchell,  South  Bend.
Huey,  Smithville.
Ozark,  Ozark.
Greenville,  Greenville.
Byers,  Grand  Glaize.
Columbia,  Magnolia.
Merrick,  Boseville.
Bayless,  Ouachita.
Elizabeth,    *  Elizabeth.
St.  Charles,  St.  Charles.
Centre  Point,  Centre  Point.    Moses  Hill.
Cache,  Clarendon.    B.F.Kerr.
Gainesborough,  Gainesborough.    M.  M.  Henderson.
Lamartine,  Lamartine.    A.Ferguson.
Pike,  Murfreesborough.      4th  Saturday.  W.  J.  White.
Quitman,  Quitman.    Hy.  Halbert.
Muscogee,  Creek  Agency.    ;  C.  M.  Slover.
Bichmond,  Richmond.
Hickory  Plains,  Hickory  Plains.         2d  Saturday.  Wm.  L.  Roscoe.
Moore,  Mount  Elba.    J.  Renfro.
Lebanon,  Big  Creek.    H.H.Hayes.
Pigeon  Hill,  Wilmington.    A.  L.  Witherington
Mt.  Pleasant,  Saundersville.    Thomas  Henry.
Sulphur  Spring,  Amity.
Leake,  Leake's  Store.
Cincinnati,  Cincinnati.     George  Gibson.
Bluff  Spring,  MarshaU  Prairie   John  M.  Carithers.
Carouse,  Lone  Grove.    W.  H.  Rushing.
Lewisburg,  Lewisburg.    S.  J.  Stallings.
Rob  Morris,  Prairieville.    C.C.Rose.
Green  Grove,  Green  Grove.    C.  W.  Harrison.
Shady  Grove,  Shady  Grove.    H.H.Elliott.
Palestine,  Mount  Elba.

--- Sayfa 77 ---
ARKANSAS.
6ft
No.  Lodge.  Location.  Time  op  Meeting.  Master.
HO  Hamilton,  Hamilton.
  Thos.  W.  Gray.
111  Patterson,  Clinton.    J.H.Patterson.
112  Scottville,  Scottville.    W.D.Linton.
113  Branson,  Florence.    James  Miles.
114  Centre  Hill,  Centre  Hill.
115  Campbell,  Burrowville.    R,.  N.  Melton.
116  Washitaw,  Orion.    Ira  S.  Perry.
117  Yellville,  Yellville.    ;
 T.F.Austin.
118  SpringHill,  SpringHill.    Wm.  J.  Heighten.
119  Pea  Ridge,  Pea  Ridge.
120  Pleasant  Grove,  D'Armond's  Mills      I.  J.  Carlton.
121  Tremont,  Tremont.
122  White  Sulphur,  White  Sul.  Springs   S.  W.  McGehee.
123  Bluffton,  Bluffton.    0.  H.  P.  Cornelius.
124  Lake  Bluff,  Lake  Bluff.     B.G.Atkins.
125  Brushy  Woods,  Como.    ....S.Johnson,
126  Bayou  Dota,  SulphurRock.    J.Morris.
127  Springfield,  Springfield.    S.S.Ford.
128  Dallas,  Dallas.
129  Caseyville,  Caseyville.    A.  Lynch.
130  Euclid,  Mount  Adams.    S.M.Allen.
131  Greenwood,  Greenwood.    G.J.Clark.
132  Waldron,  Waldron.
133  Napoleon,  Napoleon.    „....  Alex.  Rudd.
134  Atlanta,  Atlanta.
135  Mount  Ida,  Mount  Ida.    W.W.Bailey.
Elm  Springs,  Elm  Springs.    M.D.Steele.
Lucy,  Van  Buren.  1st  Monday.  W.  W.  Woosley.
Evening  Shade,  Evening  Shade.
Crooked  Creek,  Crooked  Creek.
Harrisburg,  Harrisburg.
Abraham,  Rondo.    Jas.  Abraham.
Lanark,  Lanark.  2d  Saturday.  J.  C.  Avant.
Lunenberg,  Rock  Bayou.  1st  &  3d  Fridays.       W.  H.  Low.
Cedar  Grove,  Cedar  Grove.
Curia,  Curia.
Sardis,  Gravel  Ridge.  1st  Saturday.  W.  McCauley.
Crescent,  Portland.
Charleston,  Charleston,
Pitman,  Pitman,
Walnut  Plains,  Walnut  Plains.
  T.  C.  Williamson.
Ebenezer,  Graves.
Olive  Branch,  Olive  Branch.    C.  T.  Field.
Adams,  Pleasant  Run.  Friday  after  f.  m.      Josh.  D.  Adams.
Wooten,  Honey  Fount.  3d  Saturday.  J.  Tidwell.
Wise,    ,
 J.  J.  Wise.
Acacia,  Jefferson  co.
Note. — In  consequence  of  our  going  to  press  while  the  Grand  Lodge  waB  in  session,  we  were  unable
to  get  either  the  numbers  of  the  above  Lodges,  the  names  of  all  the  Masters,  or  the  times  of  meeting.

--- Sayfa 78 ---
66
WORLD'S   MASONIC   REGISTER.
GRAND  CHAPTER.
Organized  April  28,  5851.
The  Grand  Chapter  of  Arkansas  is  subordinate  to  the  General  Grand  Chapter.
It  holds  its  Annual  Communications  at  Little  Bock,  on  the  fourth  Thursday  of
October.  According  to  the  last  report  in  our  possession  there  were  16  Sub-
ordinate Chapters  in  this  jurisdiction,  having  479  members.  Exalted  during  the
year,  82  ;  Admitted,  8 ;  Deaths,  3  ;  Dimitted,  19  ;  Eejected,  4 ;  Suspended,  1 ;
Expelled,  1 ;  Amount  of  dues,  $289  50.
SUBORDINATE  CHAPTERS.
No.       Name.
1  Far  West,
2  Union,
5  Des  Arc,
6  Eureka,
7  Lafayette,
9  Batesville,
10  Woodlawn,
11  Magnolia,
13  Monticello,
14  Warren,
15  Lamartine,
16  Aberdeen,
17  Gray,
18  Paraclifta,
19  Tillman,
20  Huntsville,
Location.
Fayetteville.
Little  Rock.
Des  Arc.
Pigeon  Hill.
Pine  Bluff.
Batesville.
Woodlawn.
Magnolia.
Monticello.
Warren.
Lamartine.
Aberdeen.
Princeton.
Paraclifta.
Searcy.
Huntsville.
Time  of  Meeting.
2d  Friday.
2d  Monday.
Friday  on  or  bef.  full  moon.
1st  Saturday.
Last  Saturday.
Last  Monday.
3d  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
2d  Thursday.
1st  Thursday.
Friday  before  1st  Saturday.
4th  Monday.
2d  Friday.
4th  Saturday.
3d  Thursday.
3d  Wednesday.
GRAND  COUNCIL.
A  Grand  Council  has  recently  been  organized  in  Arkansas,  of  which  the  only
information  we  have  at  the  time  of  going  to  press  is,  that  Companion  E.  H.
English  was  elected  Most  Illustrious  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Council.
GRAND  CONSISTORY.
Of  Sub  •  Pr  •  of  ye  R.\  S.-.  32  degree,  organized,  inaugurated,  and  installed
August  2d,  1858,  at  Little  Bock.
ORIGINAL  MEMBERS.
Luke  E  Barber,  Com.
Elbert  H.  English,  Dep.  Com.
Geo.  C.  Watkins,  1st  Lt.  Com.
Roderick  L.  Dodge,  2d  Lt.  Com.
James  A.  Henry,
Thomas  D.  Merrick,
John  H.  Newbern,
Samuel  W.  Williams,
Granville  McPherson,
Alexander  Huey,
Louis  Gedge,
Benj.  F.  Danley,
Andre  T.  Hutt,
Jno.  J.  McAlmont,
Andrew  T.  Smith.

--- Sayfa 79 ---
ARKANSAS.  6?
HUGH  DB  PAYENS'  COMMANDERY,  No.  1.
There  is  one  Commandery  in  Arkansas,  which  is  located  at  Little  Bock,  and
has  the  above  title.  It  was  chartered  September  10, 1856,  and  at  the  Triennial
Session  of  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the  United  States,  in  September,  1859,  its
membership  consisted  of  38  Sir  Knights.
SUBSCRIBERS'  NAMES.
Barber,  Luke  E.,  Clerk  of  Supreme  Court,  Little  Eock.  P.  G.  Master  of
Grand  Lodge  of  Arkansas ;  "Western  Star,  2 ;  P.  G.  H.  Priest  of  Grand  Chap,  of
Arkansas ;  Union  chap.,  2  ;  Occidental  coun.,  1 ;  Hugh  de  Payen's  com.,  1.
Feibleman,  E.(  Merchant,  firm  of  Peibleman  &  Co.,  Lamartine,  and  Block
&  Feibleman,  Camden,  Ark.     Lamartine,  90 ;  Lamartine  chap.,  15.
Hays,  Henry  Herman,  Big  Creek,  Philips  co.  Lebanon,  97  ;  Helena  chap.,
5;  Occidental  coun.,  1;  Hugh  de  Payen's  com.,  1;  D.  D.  G.  M.  for  5th  district.
Hynemao,  Lewis,  Merchant,  Little  Bock,  B.  A.  M.
Hyneman,  Moses  L.,  Little  Bock,  Melita  Lodge,  No.  295,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Murrell,  George  M.,  Farmer,  Park  Hill.    J.  W.  Cherokee,  21.
Pike,  Albert,  Lawyer,  Little  Bock.  Magnolia,  60 ;  Union  chap.,  2  ;  Occi-
dental coun.,  1 ;  Hugh  de  Payen's  com.,  1 ;  Supreme  coun.,  33,  at  Charleston.
Smith,  Bev.  Peyton  B.,  Missionary  Baptist,  Monticello.  Grand  Chaplain  of
Grand  Lodge ;  Eureka,  40 ;  Monticello  chap.,  13.  E.  P.  and  E.  in  1834,  and
received  chap,  and  coun.  degrees  all  in  Tennessee.
DISPENSING  WITH  A  SUPPER.
I  was  present,  a  few  years  since,  at  a  communication  'of  one  of  the  Lodges  in
the  City  of  Charleston,  South  Carolina,  (St.  Andrew's,  No.  10,)  when  an  appli-
cation from  the  widow  of  a  Mason  for  charity  was  read  by  the  Worshipful
Master.  It  was  the  custom  then  of  that  Lodge,  as  it  was  of  many  others,  to
sit  down,  at  frequent  seasons,  to  a  plentiful  though  not  extravagant  supper,  after
the  labors  of  the  evening  had  been  closed.  On  the  present  occasion,  after  the
letter  had  been  read,  and  while  the  members  were  consulting  as  to  the  amount
of  relief  which  the  Lodge  could  afford  to  give,  the  Senior  "Warden  arose  in  his
place,  and  remarked  as  follows : —
"Worshipful  Sir,  The  supper  of  which  the  Lodge  will  partake  at  the  next,
meeting  will  cost  at  least  twenty-five  dollars ;  this  amount,  however,  I  propose
to  save  to  the  Lodge ;  I  therefore  suggest  that  we  abandon  the  idea  of  a  supper,
and  that  the  amount  which  it  would  cost  be  bestowed  upon  the  widow  whose
letter  lies  on  your  pedestal."  The  motion  was  carried  by  acclamation.  The
Brethren  dispensed  with  the  supper,  and  enjoyed  a  far  more  delicious  feast  in
the  thought  that  in  thus  resigning  a  transient  enjoyment  they  had  contributed
to  the  comfort  of  a  Brother's  widow. — The  Mystic  Tie.

--- Sayfa 80 ---
CALIFORNIA.
GRAND  LODGE.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  California  was  organized  April  18th,  5850.  Its  Com-
munications are  annual,  and  held  in  the  City  of  Sacramento,  commencing  the
second  Tuesday  of  May.  Its  membership  is  composed  of  the  Grand  Officers,
Past  Grand  Officers,  Past  Masters,  and  Masters  and  Wardens  of  the  subordin-
ate Lodges.
The  revenue  of  the  Grand  Lodge  is  derived  from  the  following  sources,  viz. :
For  a  Dispensation  to  open  a  new  lodge     ....      $75
For  a  Charter  to  perpetuate  a  lodge,  in  addition    .        .        .50
For  a  Dispensation  to  hold  an  election        ....        10
For  a  Dispensation  for  a  re-ballot
10
For  a  Diploma
2
For  each  Degree  conferred      ...  .        .  1
For  each  Affiliation
1
For  each  Master  Mason
1
There  are  126  Subordinate  Lodges  and  four  under  dispensation  in  this  juris-
diction. The  number  of  affiliated  members,  as  per  last  returns,  was  637  B.  A.,
288  F.  C,  5055  M.  M.  The  returns  of  the  Subordinate  Lodges  for  the  year
ending  May,  5860,  show  the  following  work :  Initiated,  838 ;  Passed,  755 ;
Eaised,  732  ;  Affiliated,  474  ;  "Withdrawn,  684;  Suspended  for  non-payment  of
dues,  11 3  ;  Suspended  for  unmasonic  conduct,  7 ;  Expelled,  15 ;  Restored,  26 ;
Died,  57  ;  Rejected,  231.
The  receipts  of   the   Grand  Lodge,  for  the  year  ending  March  1,  were
$10,306  20.
The  present  officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  California  are  :—
N.  Greene  Curtis,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
Philip  W.  Shepheard,  E.  W.  Dep.  Grand  Master.
William  C.  Belchek,  R.  W.  Senior  Grand  Warden.
Alvinza  Haywakd,  R.  W.  Junior  Grand  Warden.
Addison  Martin,  "V.  W.  Grand  Treasurer.
Alexander  G.  Abell,  V.  W.  Grand  Secretary.
Lawrence  C.  Owen,  Assistant  Grand  Secretary.
William  Hill,  Grand  Chaplain.
Addison  C.  Niles,  Grand  Orator.
Walter  Van  Dyke,  Grand  Marshal.
J.  T.  Hioeee,  Grand  Standard  Bearer.
Gilbert  B.  Claiborne,  Grand  Sword  Bearer.
George  C.  Fount,  Grand  Bible  Bearer.
Wm.  Rufus  Longley,  Senior  Grand  Deacon.
C.  E.  Wilcoxon,  Junior  Grand  Deacon.
(68)

--- Sayfa 81 ---
CALIFORNIA.
Benjamin  P.  Mookb,  )
Alton  T.  Nelson,      }
Grand  Stewarts,
Henry  L.  Davis,  Grand  Organist.
Wm.  0.  Middleton,  Grand  Pursuivant.
Joel  Noah,  Grand  Tyler.
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.
Location.  Time  op  Meeting.
1  California,
2  Western  Star,
3  Tehama,
5  Benicia,
8  Tuolumne,
9  Marysville,
10  San  Jose,
12  Yount,
13  Nevada,
14  Temple,
16  Eureka,
17  Parfaite  Union,
18  Mountain  Shade,
19  San  Joaquin,
20  Washington,
21  Hawaiian,
22  Occidental,
23  Madison,
24  Mariposa,
25  Georgetown,
26  El  Dorado,
27  Trinity,
28  Columbia,
29  Diamond,
30  Golden  Gate,
31  Mokelumne,
32  Gold  Hill,
33  Ophir,
34  Santa  Clara,
35  San  Diego,
36  Butte,
37  St.  John's,
38  Santa  Cruz,
39  Yuba,
40  Sacramento,
41  Martinez,
42  Loa  Angelos,
43  Hiram,
44  Mount  Moriah,
45  Crescent,
46  Texas,
San  Francisco.
Shasta.
Sacramento.
Benicia.
Sonora.
Marysville.
San  Jose.
Napa.
Nevada.
Sonoma.
Auburn.
San  Francisco.
Downieville.
Stockton.
Sacramento.
Honolulu.
San  Francisco.
Grass  Valley.
Mariposa.
Georgetown.
Placerville.
Weaverville.
Columbia.
Diamond  Springs.
San  Francisco.
Mokelumne  Hill.
Virginia.
Murphy's.
Santa  Clara.
San  Diego.
Bidwell.
Yreka.
Santa  Cruz.
Marysville.
Sacramento.
Martinez.
Los  Angelos.
El  Dorado.
San  Francisco.
Crescent  City.
San  Juan.
1st  Thursday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Monday.
Wed.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Thursday.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
Sat.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  of  or  b.  f.  m,
La  Premier  Vendredi
Sat.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
Monday  before  f.  m.
1st  Thursday.
1st  Monday.
1st  Monday.
1st  Tuesday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
Last  Monday.
1st  Thursday.
Sat.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Tuesday.
2d  Tuesday.
1st  Saturday.
4th  Thursday.
3d  Saturday.
1st  Monday.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
Sat.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Wednesday.
1st  Friday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Monday.
Wed.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  Wednesday.
Mon.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  Saturday.
Benj.  H.  Freeman.
Chas.  L.  Danielson.
Alton  T.  Nelson.
Horatio  B.  Hawkins.
Geo.  W.  Bailey.
Jeremy  B.  Totman.
John  B.  Hewson.
Robert  Crouch.
Addison  C.  Niles.
Samuel  H.  Bupe.
Ezra  H.  Van  Decar.
.Joseph  Haine.
B.  H.  Taylor.
Gilbert  B.  Claiborne.
Ed.  E.  Eyre.
Benj.  F.  Durham.
James  Laidley.
Ed.  McLaughlin.
Wm.  A.  King.
John  B.  Harden.
James  McBeth.
John  A.  Watson.
Wm.  A.  Davies.
W.  N.  Muffley.
Henry  J.  Morton.
W.  K.  Boucher.
J.  W.  Spann.
Wm.  H.  Barnes.
Henry  J.  Bradley.
Geo.  A.  Pendleton.
Aaron  L.Chamberlin.
N.  H.  Millard.
Geo.  K.  Porter.
Benj.  F.  Shakespear.
Wm.  F.  Knox.
Wm.  K.  Leavitt.
James  H.  Lander.
Chas.  Meredith.
Geo.  C.  Hickox.
Edgar  Mason.
John  C.  Gaster.

--- Sayfa 82 ---
70
■WORLD'S  MASONIC   REGISTER.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
47  Michigan  City,  Michigan  City.
50  Forbestown,       Forbestown.
51  Illinoistown,       Illinoistown.
52  Rough  &  Ready,Rough  and  Ready.
54  St.  James,  Jamestown.
55  Suisun,  Suisun.
56  Volcano,  Volcano.
57  Santa  Rosa,        Santa  Rosa.
58  Union,  Sacramento.
59  Gravel  Range,    Camptonville.
60  Plumas,  Quincy.
61  Live  Oak,  Oakland.
62  G.  Washington,  Chinese  Camp.
64  Natoma,  Folsom.
65  Amador,  Jackson.
66  Forest,  Forest  City.
68  Morning  Star,    Stockton.
69  Corinthian,         Marysville.
70  Enterprise,         Yuba  City.
71  Nebraska,  Michigan  City.
75  Mount'n  Forest,Eureka.
76  Bear  Mountain,  Angel's.
Petaluma.
San  Andreas.
Eureka,
lone  City.
Cacheville.
Don  Pedro's  Bar.
Todd's  Valley.
Red  Bluffs.
77  Petaluma,
78  Calaveras,
79  Humboldt,
80  lone,
81  Yolo,
82  Mountain,
83  Rising  Star,
84  Vesper,
85  Indian  Diggings,  Indian  Diggings.
86  St.  Louis,  St.  Louis.
87  Naval,
88  Quitman,
89  Rose's  Bar,
91  North  Star,
92  Acacia,
93  Caymus,
95  Henry  Clay,
96  Howard,
97  Jefferson,
98  Hornitas,
99  La  Grange,
100  Campo  Seco,
101  Clay,
102  Manzanita,
103  Oroville,
104  Lexington,
105  Siskiyou,  •
Vallejo.
Orleans  Flat.
Empire  Ranch.
Hooperville.
Coloma.
Yountville.
Sutter  Creek.
Yreka.
La  Porte.
Hornitas.
La  Grange.
Campo  Seco.
Dutch  Flat.
North  San  Juan.
Oroville.
El  Monte.
Henley.
Thurs.  of  or  b.-f.  m.
Sat.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
Sat.  of  or  af.  f.  m.
2d  Friday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Wednesday.
Mon.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
3d  Saturday.
1st  Friday.
1st  Tuesday.
Thurs.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Tuesday.
Wed.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
4th  Monday.
1st  Tuesday.
Sat.  ev.  of  or  b.  f.m.
2d  Friday.
Sat.  of  or  af.  f.  m.
Wed.  of  or  af.  f.  m.
Wed.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Thursday.
Sat.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
3d  Saturday.
Sat.  of  or  a.  f.  m.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
2d  Saturday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
3d  Thursday.
3d  Saturday.
Sat.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  Saturday.
Thu.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  Monday.
3d  Wednesday.
Tues.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Wednesday.
2d  Saturday.
Sat.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
Last  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
1st  Monday
J.  T.  Higbee.
R.  C.  Gaskill.
Ed.  J.  Brickell.
James  K.  Smith.
Wm.  D.  Newton.
Sampson  Smith.
Robert  Stewart.
Wm.  Churchman.
Gabriel  Haines.
Josiah  P.  Brown.
John  R.  Buckbee.
Jer.  E.  Witcher.
Henry  S.  Brooks.
Alfred  Spinks.
Michael  J.  Little.
Thos.  J.  Bowers.
Geo.  A.  Shurtleff.
Wm.  C.  Belcher.
John  M.  Fronk.
Wm.  B.  Kingsbury.
Danl.  W.  Mitchell.
Thos.  Deer.
Wm.  Burnett.
Orpheus  Smith.
Walter  Van  Dyke.
J.  Foot  Turner.
N.  Wycoff.
Z.  P.  Cole.
Daniel  J.  Baker.
M.  H.  Myrick.
W.  Leonidas.
Joel  Eveland.
Simon  Davis.
Sanford  O.  Pease.
A.  L.  Morrison.
Daniel  Ream.
A.  W.  Cullum.
Wm.  H.  Holliday.
Alvinza  Hayward.
John  Loag.
E.  Lane.
Saml.  W.  Carr.
John  Myers.
F.  W.  Shoemaker.
Benj.  F.  Moore.
J.  P.  Ewing.
Danl.  Jewett.
Thos.  A.  Mayes.
Danl.  Grosse.

--- Sayfa 83 ---
CALIFORNIA.
U
No.
Lodge.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
106  Areata,
107  Mt.  Jefferson,
108  Owen,
109.  Dibble,
110  Pajaro,
111  Chico,
112  Summit,
113  Eden,
114  Mount  Zion,
115  St.  Marks,
116  Windsor,
117  Concord,
119  Clinton,
120  Fidelity,
121  Ionic,
122  Alamo,
123  Sotoyomi,
124  Table  Mountain,
125  Progress,
126  La  Fayette,
127  Hermann,
128  Visalia,
129  Nicolaus,
130  Unity,
131  Woodbridge,
132  Sincerity,
133  Yosemite,
134  Vacaville,
135  Valley,
136  Pacific,
137  Oro  Fino,
138  Violet,
139  Crockett,
140  Curtis,
141  Grafton,
142  Colusa,
U.D.Franklin,
Union.
Garrote.
Johnson's  Bar.
Alpha.
Watsonville.
Chico.
Knight's  Ferry.
San  Leandro.
Grizzly  Flat.
Fiddletown.
Windsor.
Sacramento.
Horsetown.
San  Francisco.
Iowa  Hill.
Alamo.
Healdsburgh.
Oroville.
San  Francisco.
Sebastopol.
San  Francisco.
Visalia.
Nicolaus.
San  Bernardino.
Wood's  Ferry.
Rich  Bar.
Coulterville.
Vacaville.
Forman's  Ranch.
San  Francisco.
Oro  Fino.
Spanish  Flat.
San  Francisco.
Cloverdale.
Grafton.
Colusa.
Ornisbo.
1st  Monday.
Last  Saturday.
Thu.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Fri.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Wednesday.
Wed.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Thursday.
Wed.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  after  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Tuesday.
4th  Monday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
3d  Thursday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  Saturday.
Sat.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
Fri.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
4th  Tuesday.
1st  Wednesday.
1st  Saturday.
Tues.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Friday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
John  C.  Bull.
John  Macfarlane.
Gilbert  Lanphier.
M.  C.  White.
J.  B.  Tyus.
Robert  C.  Wilson.
Miniss  C.  Edwards.
Joseph  H.  Taylor.
Elijah  King.
F.  L.  Sullivan.
John  D.  Sampson.
J.  L.  Polhemus.
Benj.  M.  Parker.
Henry  Adler.
Jacob  H.  Neff.
John  M.  Jones.
John  B.  Bailhache.
Chas.  F.  Lott.
Levi  Keller. .
Wm.  L.  Taber.
Chas.  Proschold.
Joseph  N.  Thomas.
Edwin  Craine.
R.  R.  Pearce.
Cornelius  Carpenter.
R.  M.  Blakemore.
Carlton  Davidson.
Arthur  Moore.
Thos.  Wasley.
John  Wade.
Geo.  H.  Coe.
Henry  Mayenbaum.
Wm.  H.  Pottorff.
Wm.  H.  Hollis.
John  W.  Baldwin.
John  H.  Liening.
G.  A.  Blakeslee.
GRAND  CHAPTER.
The  Grand  Chapter  of  California  was  organized  May  6th,  5854,  and  is  a  sub-
ordinate of  the  General  Grand  Chapter.  The  number  of  Subordinate  Chapters
under  its  jurisdiction  at  its  Annual  Convocation,  in  May,  5860,  was  27,  the
returns  of  which  give  the  following  work:  Marked,  221;  Passed,  214;  Eeceived,
199 ;  Exalted,  205 ;  Affiliated,  22 ;  Withdrawn,  121 ;  Suspended  for  non-pay-
ment of  dues,  12  ;  Suspended  for  unmasonic  conduct,  2  ;  Expelled,  4 ;  Eestored,

--- Sayfa 84 ---
72
world's  masonic  register.
3 ;  Died,  9  ;  Rejected,  22  ;  Mark  Masters,  26.  The  returns  also  show  the  fol-
lowing totals  of  affiliation :  Past  Masters,  35 ;  Most  Excellent  Masters,  5  ;
Royal  Arch  Masons,  1025.  The  receipts  of  the  Grand  Chapter  for  the  year
ending  March  31st,  5860,  were  $3037  49.
SUBORDINATE  CHAPTERS.
No.       Chapter.
1  San  Francisco,
2  Sonora,
3  Sacramento,
4  El  Dorado,
5  California,
6  Nevada,
7  Benicia,
8  Columbia,
9  Shasta,
10  Forest,
11  Sutter,
12  Calaveras,
13  Washington,
14  Howard,
15  Cyrus,
16  St.  James,
17  Libanus,
18  Grass  Valley.
19  Trinity,
20  Franklin,
21  Sierra,
22  Petaluma,
23  Oliver,
24  La  Fayette,
25  Georgetown,
26  Oakland,
U.D.Delta,
Location.
San  Francisco.
Sonora.
Sacramento.
Diamond  Springs.
San  Francisco.
Nevada.
Benicia.
Columbia.
Shasta.
Forest  City.
Sutter  Creek.
Murphy's.
Marysville.
San  Jose.
Yreka.
Placerville.
Iowa  Hill.
Grass  Valley.
Weaverville.
Oroville.
Downieville.
Petaluma.
Todd's  Valley.
Camptonville.
Georgetown.
Oakland.
Auburn.
Time  op  Meeting.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
1st  Wednesday.
1st  Tuesday.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
1st  Monday.
Tuesday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Monday.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
Thur.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
2d  &  4th  Weds.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
2d  Saturday.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
Thur.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Wednesday.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
W.of  f.m.&2  weeks  a.
F.  of  f.m.  &  2  weeks  a.
Th.b.f.m.&2weeksa.
Th.off.m.&2weeksa.
Charters  Granted.
July  28,  5854.
July  28,  5854.
July  28,  5854.
April  30,  5855.
April  30,  5855.
April  30,  5855.
April  30,  5855.
April  30,  5855.
April  30,  5855.
April  30,  5855.
May  3,     5856.
May  3,
May  3,
May  3,
May  3,
May  8,
May  8,
May  7,
May  7,
May  7,
May  7,
May  7,
May  6,
May  6,
May  4,
May  5,
5856.
5856.
5856.
5856.
5857.
5857.
5858.
5858.
5858.
5858.
5858.
5859.
5859.
5860.
5860.
GRAND  COMMANDERY.
This  Grand  Commandery  was  formed  August  10th,  1858.  We  have  not
received  its  proceedings  since  its  formation,  and  are  therefore  unable  to  give
all  the  necessary  data.  There  are,  however,  6  Subordinate  Oommanderies  in
California,  which  have  a  total  membership  of  204.
The  following  are  the  only  Commanderies  of  which  we  have  information,  viz.:
No.  Name.
1  San  Francisco,
2  Sacramento,
3  Pacific,
Location.
San  Francisco.
Sacramento.
Columbia.

--- Sayfa 85 ---
CALIFORNIA.  73
SUBSCE1BEES'   NAMES.
POKEST  CITY.
Bope,  John  B.,  Parmer,  Plum  Valley.    Forest,  66 ;  Forest  chap.,  10 ;  Sacra-
mento encpt.,  2.
Brans,  M.  B.,  Merchant.    Forest,  66  ;  Forest  chap.,  10.
Fitz  James,  James,  Book-keeper.    P.  M.  Nevada,  13 ;  Sacramento  chap.,  3.
Fleming,  William,  Expressman.    Forest,  66.
Kirkpatrick,  John,  Miner.    Forest,  66  ;  Forest  chap.,  10.
McNutt,  G.  A.,  Miner.    Forest,  66.
Miller,  George,  Baker.    Forest,  66.
Patchin,  Clint.  H.,  Hotel-keeper.    Forest,  66  ;  Forest  chap.,  10.
Reed,  Thornton,  A.,  Hotel-keeper.    Forest,  66.
Scott,  "Washington,  Miner.    Forest,  66.
Winters,  Theo.,  Merchant.    Forest,  66  ;  Forest  chap.,  10.
SAN  FBABTCISCO.
Creigh,  J..D.,  Attorney  at  Law,  San  Francisco.  California,  1 ;  San  Francisco
chap.,  1.     P.  G.  H.  P.  of  G.  C.  of  California.
Parker,  Samuel  H.,  Attorney  at  Law,  San  Francisco.    Strafford,  29,  N.  H.
Richards,  James  R.,  Com.  Mer.  J.  W.,  Occidental,  22 ;  R.  A.  M.  San  Fran-
cisco.
Adler,  Adolph,  Merchant,  Campo  Seco.
Andrews,  Lorrin,  Jr.,  Clerk,  Honolulu,  Hawaiian  Islands.  Hawaiian,  21 ;
Covington  chap.,  35,  Ky.;  Kenton  coun.,  13,  Ky. ;  Covington  encpt.,  7,  Ky.
Brown,  Edward,  Miner,  Campo  Seco.    Campo  Seco,  100.
Green,  Jonathan,  Tailor,  Shasta  City.    P.  M.  St.  John's,  37 ;  Shasta  chap.,  9.
Kitts,  David  B.,  Miner,  Indian  Creek.     S.  W.  North  Star.
Kline,  Christian,  J.,  Baker,  Downieville.     Mountain  Shade,  18.
Lander,  James  H,  Lawyer,  Los  Angelos.    W.  M.  Los  Angelos,  42.
Peterson,  James  H,  Miner,  Omega,  Nevada  Co.    Dibble,  109.
Reed,  Thomas  M.,  County  Treasurer,  El  Dorado  co.,  Colomo.  P.  M.  George-
town, 25  ;  Sherburne  chap.,  Ky.
Ries,  Christian,  Quartz  Miner,  Downieville.     Mountain  Shade,  18.
Thurman,  Leach  B.,  Dealer  in  Groceries,  Provisions,  and  Miners'  supplies  in
general,  Auburn.    Ionic,  121.

--- Sayfa 86 ---
CANADA.
GRAND   LODGE.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  Canada  was  organized  October  10th,  5855.
Its  communications  are  Annual,  and  commence  on  the  first  "Wednesday  in
July.    It  is  not  permanently  located,  the  place  of  meeting  being  decided  on  at
each  Annual  Communication.
The  Grand  Lodge  consists  of  the  Elective  and  Appointed  Officers,  (excepting
the  Grand  Tyler,)  Past  Grand  Officers,  Past  Masters,  and  Masters  and  Wardens
of  Subordinate  Lodges.
The  fees  payable  to  the  Grand  Lodge  are  as  follows : —
For  granting  a  new  "Warrant    .
For  Dispensation  for  a  new  Lodge
For  a  Warrant  of  Confirmation
For  a  new  "Warrant,  lost  or  destroyed
For  Dispensation  to  initiate  under  age
For  Dispensation  for  each  Degree
For  Dispensation  to  initiate  more  than  five,  for  each,
For  Dispensation  for  public  processions
For  Grand  Lodge  Certificate     .
For  Eegistration  Fee    ....
For  every  Initiation
Registration  Fee  .        .        ,        .
For  affiliation  of  E.  A.  and  F.  C.      .
For  affiliation  of  Master  Masons  .
Every  member  of  each  Lodge,  per  annum.
There  are  137  Subordinate  Lodges,  and  3  under  dispensation,  under  the  juris-
diction of  the  Grand  Lodge.     Number  of  Affiliated  members  are  estimated  at
7000.     The  income  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  the  past  year,  was  over  $4000.
The  Officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  for  the  present  year  are  as  follows  :—
T.  Douglas  Harington,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
William  B.  Simpson,  B.  W.  Deputy  Grand  Master.
Denis  Gale,  E.  "W.  Grand  Senior  Warden.
T.  D.  Warren,  E.  W.  Grand  Junior  Warden.
Eev.  James  A.  Preston,  E.  W.  Grand  Chaplain.
Henry  Groff,  E.  W.  Grand  Treasurer.
Edwin  Heathfield,  R.  W.  Grand  Eegistrar.
Thomas  B.  Harris,  R.  "W.  Grand  Secretary.
F.  Wolferst.  Thomas,  E.  W.  D.D.G.M.,  London  District.
Geo.  W.  Whitehead,  E.  W.  D.D.G.M.,  Wilson  "
jEmilius  Irving,  E.  W.  D.D.G.M.,  Huron  «■
(74)
£7
10s.
Od
5 00
0
2 10
0
2 10
0
5 00
0
5 00
0
,  1
00
0
0
5
0
0
10
0
0
2
6
0
10
0
0
5
0
0
7
6
0
5
0
0
2
6

--- Sayfa 87 ---
CANADA.  T5
Charles  Magill,  K.  W.  D.D.G.M.,  Hamilton  District.
Samoel  B.  Harman,  E.  W.  D.D.G.M.,  Toronto
Joseph  B.  Hall,  R.  W.  D^D.G.M.,  Ontario
A.  A.  Campbell,  R.  "W.  D.D.G.M., Prince  Edward
George  E.  LaSerre,  R.  W.  D.D.G.M.,  Central
A.  A.  Stevenson,  R.  W.  D.D.G.M.,  Montreal
Michael  Mitchell,  R.  W.  D.D.G.M.,  Eastern  Tp.
Richard  Pors,  R.  W.  D.D.G.M.,  Quebec
P.  P.  Harris,  V.  W.  Grand  Senior  Deacon.
James  Seymour,  V.  W.  Grand  Junior  Deacon.
"William  G.  Storm,  Y.  W.  Grand  Superintendent  of  Works.
Alfred  DeGrassi,  Y.  W.  Grand  Director  of  Ceremonies.
Thomas  McCraken,  V.  "W.  Assistant  Grand  Secretary.
A.  W.  O'Giltie,  V.  W.  Grand  Sword  Bearer.
Thos.  Mackie,  V.  W.  Assistant  Grand  Director  of  Ceremonies.
Alfred  Boultbee,  V.  W.  Grand  Organist.
James  M.  Rogerson,  V.  W.  Assistant'  Grand  Organist.
Stanislaus  Blondheim,  V.  W.  Grand  Pursuivant.
John  Morrison,  Grand  Tyler.
C.  "W.  Matheson,  John  Davidson,  Arthur  Murray,  Isaac  Dennis,
Benjamin  C.  Davy,  Thos.  Camm,  E.  Moss,  William  C.  Tait,  V.  W.  Grand
Stewards.
Representatives.
W.  C.  Stevens,  Representative  of  the  United  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  at  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Canada.
Kivas  Tully,  Representative  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ireland,  at  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Canada.
A.  Bernard,  Representative  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Vermont,  at  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Canada.
Thomas  B.  Harris,  Representative  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Kansas,  at  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Canada.
Cyril  Pearl,  Representative  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Maine,  at  the   Grand
Lodge  of  Canada.
Earl  Ripon,  Representative  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Canada,  at  the  United
Grand  Lodge  of  England.
Michael  Purnell,  Representative  of  the    Grand  Lodge  of  Canada,  at  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Ireland.
***  The  Sixth  Annual  Communication  of  G.  L.  will  be  held  at  London,  C.  W.,  on  the  second  Wednes-
day in  July,  a.l.  5861.

--- Sayfa 88 ---
WORLD'S   MASONIC  REGISTER.
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.
*#*  Lodges  marked  thus  (*)  hold  their  Installation  of  Officers  on  the  Festival  of  St.  John
the  Eoangelisi — all  others  on  that  of  St.  John  the  Baptist.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
—  *  Antiquity  Lodge,
1  Provost,
2  Niagara,
3  *St.  John's,
4  *Dorchester,
5  *Sussex,
6  Barton,
7  Union,
8  *Nelson,
9  *Union,
10  *Norfolk,
11  *Moira,
12  *Golden  Kule,
13  Western  Light,
14  *True  Briton's
15  St.  George's,
16  St.  Andrew's,
17  St.  John's,
18  *Prince  Ed'rd's,
19  *St.  George's,
20  *St.  John's,
21  *Zetland,
22  King  Solomon's,
23  *Bichmond,
24  *St.  Francis,
25  *Ionio,
26  *Ontario,
27  *StrictObser'ce,
28  *Mount  Zion,
29  *United,
30  *Composite,
31  Jerusalem,
32  *Amity,
33  Wellington,
34  *Thistle,
35  St.  John's,
36  Welland,
37  *King  Hiram,
38  *Trent,
39  *Mount  Zion,
40  *St.  John's,
41  St.  George's,
42  *St.  George's,
Montreal.
Dunham.
Niagara.
Kingston.
St.  John's.
Brockville.
Hamilton.
Grimsby.
Henryville.
Napanee.
Simcoe.
Belleville.
Stanstead.
Bolton.
Perth.
St.  Catharines.
Toronto.
Cobourg.
Picton.
Montreal.
London.
Montreal.
Toronto.
Richmond  Hill.
Smith's  Falls.
Toronto.
Port  Hope.
Hamilton.
Kemptville.
Brighton.
Whitby.
Bowmanville.
Dunnville.
Guelph.
Amherstburg.
Cayuga.
Fonthill.
Ingersoll.
Trenton.
Brooklin.
Hamilton.
Kingsville.
London.
1st  Thursday.
Tues.  preceding  f.  m.
1st  Tuesday.
1st  Thursday.
1st  Thursday.
Wed.  on  or  pr.  f.  m.
2d  Wednesday.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
3d  Tuesday.
1st  Friday  b.  f.  m.
Thurs  on  or.  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  pr.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Monday.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  Tuesday.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thursday  prec.  f.  m.
3d  Tuesday.
2d  Tuesday.
2d  Thursday.
2d  Thursday.
Thursday  prec.  f.  m.
Friday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Tuesday.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
3d  Tuesday.
Wed.  prec.  f.  m.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Thursday.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  after  f.  m.
1st  Wednesday.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
1st  and  3d  Tuesday.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  pr.  f.  m.
3d  Thursday.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Wednesday.
Edwin  Morris.
David  Brown.
R.  M.  Wilson.
J.  A.  Henderson.
G.  T.  Morehouse.
Thomas  Camm.
William  Irwin.
William  Fitch.
Geo.  W.  Barker.
A.  S.  Bristol.
Henry  Groff.
L.  H.  Henderson.
W.  B.  Colby.
James  Wilson.
John  Murray.
Theoph.  Mack.
Wm.  R.  Harris.
David  Barker.
A.  A.  Stevenson.
Edw.  Heathfield.
Edward  Himes.
Oliver  Gable.
D.  Bridgford.
Edw.  Chalmers.
Wm.  C.  Chewett.
Joseph  B.  Hall.
Jas.  M.  Rogerson.
Thomas  Waugh.
John  Eyre.
Yeoman  Gibson.
John  McLeod.
A.  Brownson.
Wm.  Hayward.
George  Gott.
William  Mussen.
Isaac  P.  Wilson.
Geo.  W.  Allen.
R.  Gordon.
George  B.  Mott.
Thos.  McCraken.
A.  C.  Black.  '
Thomas  Mackie.

--- Sayfa 89 ---
CANADA.
11
No.          Lodge.
Location.
Time  of  Meeiino.
Master.
43  King  Solomon' 3,  Woodstock.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m. George  Forbes.
44  *St.  Thomas,
St.  Thomas.
1st  Thursday.
Henry  Caldwell.
45  Brant,
Brantford.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
D.  Curtis,  Jr.
46  Wellington,
Chatham.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
47  *Great  Western,  Windsor.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m .  A.  K.  Dewson.
48  *Madoc,
Madoc.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
Thos.  S.  Agar.
49  *Harington,
Quebec.
3d  Thursday.
Richard  Pope.
50  *Conseeon,
Consecon.
Friday  prec.  f.  m.
H.  G.  Squier.
51  Corinthian,
Grahamville.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m. Joseph  Figg.
52  Wellington,
Dunnville.
Monday  prec.  f.  m.
W.  S.  Brown.
53  *Shefford,
Waterloo.
1st  Monday.
H.  L.  Robinson.
54  *Vaughan,
Maple.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m. Joseph  Ingram.
55  *Mirickville.
Mirickville.
Tuesday  after  f.  m.
C.  Leggo,  Jr.
56  Victoria,
Port  Sarnia.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m. George  Masson.
57  *Harmony,
Binbrook.
Monday  after  f.  m.
William  Brown.
58  *Dorio,
Ottawa.
1st  Wednesday.
W.  J.  B.  McL.  Moore.
59  *Corinthian,
Ottawa.
3d  Thursday.
Fred.  Marett.
60  *Hoyle,
La  Colle.
2d  Tuesday.
T.  S.  Haynes.
61  Acacia,
Hamilton.
3d  Friday.
F.  J.  Rastrick.
62  St.  Andrew's,
Caledonia.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
J.  B.  Holden,
63  Simcoe,
Simcoe.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m. C.  W.  Matheson.
64  *Kilwinning,
London.
3d  Thursday.
John  Harrison.
65  *Rehoboam,
Toronto.
1st  Thursday.
D.  Thurston.
66  *Durham,
Newcastle.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m. Samuel  Wilmot.
67  *St.  Francis,
Richmond.
1st  Thursday.
Wm.  C.  Tait.
68  *St.  John's,
Ingersoll.
1st  Thursday.
Jno.  Galliford.
69  Stirling,
Stirling.
Thursday  after  f.  m .  W.  C.  Brownson.
70  *King,'
King.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Joseph  Smelser.
71  *Victoria,
Sherbrooke.
2d  Monday.
G.  H.  Borlase.
72  *Alma,
Gait.
3d  Tuesday.
A.  T.  H.  Ball.
73  *St.  James's,
St.  Mary's.
1st  Monday.
L.  A.  Mclntyre.
74  *St.  James's,
Maitland.
Mon.  on  or  a.  f.  m.
G.  C.  Longley.
75  St.  John's,
Toronto.
1st  Monday.
Joseph  Jackes.
76  *Oxford,
Woodstock.
2d  Wednesday.
Jordan  Charles.
77  *FaithfulBreth .,Oakwood.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
Andrew  Smith.
78  *King  Hiram,
Tilsonburg.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Peter  Taylor.
79  Simcoe,
Bradford.
Thursday  a.  f.  m.
80  Albion,.
Newbury.
1st  Tuesday.
C.  J.  Campbell.
81  *St.  John's,
Delaware.
1st  Tuesday.
John  Dutton.
82  St.  John's,
Paris.
1st  Tuesday.
Wesley  Howell.
83  Beaver,
Strathroy.
1st  Friday  a.  f.  m.
Joseph  H.  Blain.
84  *Clinton,
Clinton.
Wed.  on  or  a.  f.  m.
Russel  H.  Read.
85  Rising  Sun,
Farmersville.
Thurs.  nearest  f.  m. A.  A.  Chamberlin.
86  *Wilson,
Toronto.
3d  Tuesday.
L.  L.  Levey.
87  Markham  Union, Mar kh am.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m. Hy.  R.  Corson.
88  St.  George's,
Owen  Sound.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Hy.  McPherson.
89  *King  Hiram,
Lindsay.
1st  Tuesday.
H.  McL.  Fraser.
90  *Manito,
Collingwood.
Thurs.  on  or  a.  f.  m .  Thos.  C.  Prosser.
91  *Colborne,
Colborne.
Wednesday  a.  f.  m.
James  S.  Strong.

--- Sayfa 90 ---
78
world's  masonic  register.
Time  op  Meeting.
92  Cataraqui,
93  *NorthernLight,
94  *St.  Mark's,
95  Ridout,
96  *Corinthian,
97  *Sharon,
98  True  Blue,
99  *Tuscan,
100  Valley,
101  *Corinthian,
102  Mount  Brydges,
103  *Maple  Leaf,
104  St.  John's,
105  St.  Mark's,
106  *Burford,
107  St.  Paul's,
108  Blenheim,
109  Albion,
110  *Central,
111  *Morpeth,
112  *Maitland,
113  *Wilson,
114  *Hope,
115  *Ivy,
116  *Cassia,
117  *Stanbridge,
118  *Union,
119  Maple  Leaf,
120  Warren,
121  Doric,
122  Renfrew,
123  The  Belleville,
124  Montreal  Kilw'g,
125  Cornwall,
126  Golden  Rule,
127  Franck,
128  Pembroke,
129  The  Rising  Sun,
130  Yamaska,
131  St.  Lawrence,
132  Sweet  Home,
133  Lebanon  Forest,
134  Shawenegam,
135  St.  Clair,
136  Richardson,
U.D.  Pythagoras,
TJ.D.  Aylmer,
U.D.  Lebanon,
Kingston.
Kincardine.
Port  Stanley.
Otterville/
Barrie.
Sharon.
Albion.
Newmarket.
Dundas.
Peterboro'.
Mt.  Brydges.
St.  Catharine's.
Norwichville.
Drummondville.
Burford.
Lambeth.
Drumbo.
Sydenham.
Prescott.
Morpeth.
Goderioh.
Waterford.
Port  Hope.
Smithville.
Sylvan.
Stanbridge.
Lloydtown.
Bath.
Fingal.
Brantford.
Renfrew.
Belleville.
Montreal.
Cornwall.
Campbellford.
Frankford.
Pembroke.
Aurora.
Granby.
Southampton.
N.  Hamburgh.
Franceston.
Three  Rivers.
Milton.
Cash  el.
Meaford.
Aylmer.
Oshawa.
2d  Wednesday.
Thurs.  on  or  a   f.  m.
2d  Tuesday.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Fri.  preceding  f.  m.
1st  f uesday.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  Wednesday.
1st  Wednesday.
Wed.  on  or  prec.  f.  m.
3d  Monday.
Thurs.  on  or  a.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Tuesday.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
2d  Wednesday!
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tuesday  after  f.  m.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
2d  Thursday.
2d  Tuesday.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Thursday.
Tuesday  after  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Monday  b.  f.  m.
2d  Thursday.
Fri.  on  or  pre.  f.  m.
1st  Thursday.
2d  Monday.
Monday  after  f.  m.
Tuesday  after  f.  m.
Monday  before  f.  m.
Tuesday  before  f.  m.
Fri.  on  or  a.  f.  m.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  a.  f.  m.
Thursday  a.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  Wednesday.
2d  Thursday.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m
Fri.  on  or  a.  f.  m.
2d  Thursday.
John  V.  Noel.
C.  R.  Barker.
S.  Shepard.
John  Wood.
J.  W.  Hornsby.
Wm.  B.  Terry.
William  Lynass.
John  Bentley.
John  King.
C.  J.  Vizard.
John  Dutton.
James  Seymour.
George  L.  Beard.
Thomas  Evans.
Edwd.  Hipkins.
D.  B.  Burch.
Alex.  Murray.
James  Keeler.
John  Duck.
William  Story.
John  Boyd.
Thomas  Ridout.
George  Brant.
John  A.  Scoon.
H.  O.  Meigs.
Thos.  Swinerton.
B.  C.  Davy.
E.  W.  Gustin.
M.  W.  Pruyn.
A.  H.  Dowswell.
A.  B.  Elmer.
John  Boyd.
John  McLellan.
Isaac  M.  Lindsay.
John  B.  Young.
Jas.  P.  Moffatt.
Robert  Lyon.
Jacob  M.  Clark.
F.  H.  L.  Staunton
John  P.  Smith.
Wm.  Diamond.
A.  G.  Fenwick.
James  Regan.
James  Bowman.
W.  K.  Henderson.
Levi  R.  Church.
J.  B.  Fairbanks.

--- Sayfa 91 ---
CANADA.
?9
GRAND  CHAPTER.
Oeoanized  Januaby  20,  5857.
The  Annual  Convocations  of  this  Grand  Chapter  are  held  on  the  third  Wed-
nesday in  February.  This  Grand  Chapter  has  18  subordinates  under  its  juris-
diction.   The  returns  of  16  Chapters  give  a  total  of  membership  of  519.
SUBORDINATE   CHAPTERS.
No.             Name.
Location.
1  Anc't  Frontenao,
Kingston.
2  Hiram,
Hamilton.
3  St.  John's,
London.
4  St.  Andrew's,
Toronto.
5  St.  George's,
London.
6  St.  John's,
Hamilton.
7  Moira,
Belleville.
8  King  Solomon,
Toronto.
9  Golden  Rule,
Stanstead.
10  Kilwinning,
London.
11  Wilson,
Windsor.
12  Cataraqui,
Kingston.
13  Stadacona.
Quebec.
14  Bedford. District,
Dunham.
15  Wawanosh,
Sarnia.
16  Carleton,
Ottawa.
17  Dorchester,
St.  John's.
18  Oxford,
Woodstock.
Time  op  Meeting.  Established.
3d  Tuesday.  5797.
1st  Monday.  5820.
3d  Friday.  5844.
3d  Wednesday.  5847.
4th  Friday.  5854.
2d  Thursday.  5855.
1st  Tuesday.  5856.
3d  Tuesday.  5857.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.  5858.
1st  Monday.  5858.
1st  Monday.  5859.
2d  Monday.  5850.
2d  Thursday.  5854.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.  5859.
2d  Friday.  5859.
2d  Wednesday.  5859.
1st  Thursday.  5860.
1st  Friday.  5860.
SUBSCRIBERS'   NAMES.
CANADA  EAST.
CORNWALL.
McLellan,  John,  Marble-mason.     W.  M.,  Cornwall,  125,  B.  A.  M.
Poole,  Charles,  Solicitor  and  Attorney.  (Westminster,  Eng.)   Secretary,  Corn-
wall, 125.
Pringle,  J.  P.,  Barrister.     Cornwall,  125,  C.  E.
DUNHAM,  County  of  Missisquoi.
Prevost  Lodge  No.  1,  meets  Tuesday  before  full  moon.
GRANBX",  County  of  Sheffield.
Clark,  J.  M.,  Civil  Engineer.     W.  M.,  Yamaska,  130 ;  Prin.  IT.  Dorchester
chap.,  17.

--- Sayfa 92 ---
80  world's  masonic  register.
henrysville.
Parker,  Geo.  W.,  Saddle  and  Harness-maker.    "W.  M.,  Nelson,  8.
LENNOXVUiLB.
"Wurtele,  Louis  0.,  B.  A.  Deacon  Church  of  England,  French  Teacher  Bishop
College.    Victoria,  71,  C.  R.
MONTEBAL.
Bacon,  George.    Treasurer  Cornwall,  125.
Bacon,  Thomas,  Merchant.  Mother  Lodge,  Socrates,  511,  R.  E. ;  S.  W.,
Cornwall,  125.
Blackwood,  Thos.  F.  St.  Paul's,  514,  R.  E.;  Royal  Arch  chap.,  159,  R.  I,;
Knight  of  the  Sword,  East  Red  Cross,  Malta,  and  East  and  West ;  Encpt.,  159,
R.  I.
Browning,  Samuel,  Proprietor  of  Ottawa  House,  on  Great  St.  James  Street.
P.  S.  W.,  St.  George's,  13  ;  Hiram  chap.,  2 ;  Past  Grand  Steward  of  Grand
Lodge  of  Canada.
Cunynghame,  Thurlow,  M.D.,  University  McGill  College;  L.  R.  C.  P.  Ed.
Graduate  of  University,  Michigan,  etc. ;  Editor  Canadian  Freemason,  Montreal,
C.  E.;  St.  Paul's,  514,  R.  E. ;  St.  Paul's  chap.,  514,  R.  E.;  Exalted  in  Edin-
burgh chap.,  1,  Ed.  Scotland;  Prince  of  Rose  Croix.
Hill,  Benjamin,  Stationer.     Kilwinning.
McGill,  Capt,  Royal  Canadian  Rifles  (late  60th  Royal  Rifles.)  S.  D.,  St.  Paul's,
514,  R.  E. ;  Ark  and  Mark  Master  Jullander,  906,  Bengal,  East  India;  Super-
Excellent  Mason  Hope  Chapter,  attached  to  Hope,  596,  Meerut,  Bengal,  India;
Royal  Arch  Mason  Umballa  Chapter,  attached  to  Charity,  823,  Umballa,
Bengal,  India;  Knight  of  the  Red  Cross  of  Babylon;  Encampment  of  Charity,
Umballa,  Bengal,  India ;  (Charity,  823,  Umballa.)
Vaness,  Frederick,  Carver.    Eastern  Star,  227,  New  York  City.
QUEBEC.
Harrington,  Thomas  Douglas.  Grand  Master  of  Grand  Lodge  of  Canada;
Grand  1st  Prin.  Z.  of  Grand  chap. ;  Deputy  Provincial  Grand  Com.  of  Pro-
vincial Grand  encpt.,  Canada;  Past  Grand  Prior  of  Grand  Conclave  of  Eng-
land and  "Wales.
Pope,  Richard.    W.  M.,  Harington,  49 ;  R.  E.  Z.,  Stadacona  chap.,  13.
SHEEBEOOKE.
Reid,  Rev.  C.  P.,  Church  of  England.     Chaplain  Victoria,  71,  C.  R.
ST.  JOHN'S,  County  of  St.  John's.
Bissett,  James  H.,  Merchant.     Dorchester,  4.
■  Chillingsworth,  Henry,  Baker.     Inner  Guard,  Dorchester,  4.
Dorchester  Lodge,  No.  4,  chartered  Aug.  1st,  a.  l.  5859.    Regular  meetings,
first  Thursday  each  month.
Ducondu,  E.,  Barrister  and  County  Secretary,  Corporation  Attorney.    Dor-
chester, 4.
Futevoy,  Isaac  B.,  Station  Agent  of  S.  S.  and  C.  R.  W.    Dorchester,  4.

--- Sayfa 93 ---
CANADA.  81
Hogle,  J.  L.,  Proprietor  of  Mott's  Hotel.  Dorchester,  4;  Dorchester  chap.,  17.
Langelier,  Ludyer,  Hatter  and  .Furrier.   Dorchester,  4.
Macdonald,  Edward  &  Duncan,  Merchants.     Dorchester,  4.
Macdonald,  M.  B.,  firm  of  Charlton  &  Macdonald,  Merchants.  Secretary,
Dorchester,  4.
McGinnis,  Wm.  S.,  Land  Agent.     P.  S.  "W.,  Dorchester,  4.
Morehouse,  G.  T.,  Stoves,  Tinware,  etc.  W.  M.,  Dorchester,  4 ;  Dorchester
chap.,  17.
Osgood,  Wm,  A.,  Postmaster  and  Merchant.  P.  M.,  Dorchester,  4;  Dor-
chester chap.,  17.
Pierce,  Charles  S.,  Merchant  and  Justice  of  the  Peace.  P.  Treasurer,  Dor-
chester, 4.
Porlier,  R.  H.,  Merchant.    Dorchester,  4.
Pruyn,  Francis,  Superintendent  and  Engineer  of  S.  S.  and  C.  R.  W.  J.  W.,
Dorchester,  4;  Dorchester  chap.,  17.
Rounds,  Albert,  Contractor  and  Builder.    Dorchester,  4.
WATERLOO.
Lay,  J.  B.,  Clerk  of  Shefford  Circuit  Court  and  Law  Student.  J  W.,  Shef-
ford,  53 ;  Dorchester  chap.,  17.
Mitchell,  Michael,  Provincial  Land  Surveyor.  District  Deputy  Grand  Master
of  Grand  Lodge  of  Canada;  P.  M.,  Shefford,  53;  3d  Principal,  Dorchester
chap.,  17.
Parmelee,  A.  B.,  Advocate.  P.  M.,  Shefford,  53;  Treasurer  Dorchester
chap.,  17.
Reynolds,  Zenas,  Hotel-keeper.    Steward,  Shefford,  53.
CANADA  WEST.
ALMONTE,  County  of  Lamark.
Mostyn,  "Wm.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.     Carleton  Place,  796,  E.  R.
BELLVILLE,  County  of  Hastings.
Alport,  Fred.  William,  Produce  Com.  Merchant,  Insurance  Agent,  etc.  P.
M.,  St.  John's,  214,  E.  R. ;  P.  M.,  Moira,  11 ;  2d  Prin.  H.,  Moira  chap.,  7.
Beckett,  Robt.  A.,  Bookseller  and  Stationer.     Moira,  11.
Bell,  John,  Barrister  at  Law.     P.  M.,  Moira,  11 ;  Moira  chap.,  7.
Brennan,  David,  Proprietor  Empire  Hotel.     P.  J.  W.,  Sussex,  5.
Campbell,  Alfred  A.,  Leather  Manufacturer.  P.  M.,  Moira,  11 ;  1st  Prin.  Z.,
Moira  chap.,  7  ;  P.  S.  W.,  Hugh  De  Payen's  encpt. ;  Dist.  Deputy  G.  M.,  Prince
Ed.  Dist. ;  3d  Grand  Prin.  J.,  Grand  chap. ;  P.  G.  Sword  B.,  Grand  encpt.
Dupont,  W.  D.,  Accountant  and  Confidential  Clerk.     St.  John's,  214,  E.  R.
Elmer,  Andrew  B.,  Barrister  at  Law.  W.  M.,  Bellville,  124 ;  Sect.,  Moira,
11 ;  3d  Prin.,  J.  Moira  chap.,  7.
Franck,  John  Charles,  Notary  Public,  etc.  P.  M.,  Moira,  11 ;  P.  1st  Prin.  Z.,
Moira  chap.,  7  ;  Hugh  De  Payen's  encpt.;  P.  D.  G.  M.,  Prince  Ed.  Dist.;  G.

--- Sayfa 94 ---
82  world's  masonic  register.
Supt.  Central  dist,  G.  B.  A.  C.  of  Canada ;   Grand  Provincial  Aid-de-Camp,
Grand  encpt.
Fraser,  John  A.  Inspector  of  G.  T.  E.  W.     J.  D.,  Moira,  11 ;  St.  John's,  3.
Gillespie,  Henry  G.,  Wholesale  Grocer.     Moira,  11 ;  Moira  chap.,  7.
Henderson,  L.  H.,  Attorney  and  Solicitor  in  Chancery.  W.  M.,  Moira,  11 ;
P.  S.,  Moira  chap.,  7.
Innes,  Robt.  L.,  Civil  Engineer.     Moira,  11.
Lay,  Charles  Henry,  Station  Agent  G.  T.  E.  W.     Moira,  11.
Macinnes,  John  A.,  Clerk,  Crown  Timber  Office.  S.  W.,  Moira,  11 ;  Scribe,
E.,  Moira  chap.,  7.
Miles,  E.,  Proprietor  Hasting's  Chronicle.     Moira,  11.
Petric,  A.  O.,  Accountant  in  Bank  of  IT.  C.  Initiated  in  Ancient  Operative
Lodge,  47,  Dundee,  Scotland,  August,  a.l.  5811 ;  Celtic  Lodge  of  Leith  and
Edinburgh,  Scotland ;  Hon.  Member  Moira  and  Bellville  Lodges.
Sisson,  Emond  J.  P.  S.  W.,  Moira,  11 ;  Scribe,  N.,  Moira  chap.,  7  ;  Dist.  G.
Sect.,  Prince  Ed.  Dist.
Wallbridge,  Robt.,  Grocer.     Treas.,  Bellville,  124.
Warren,  Thomas,  Proprietor  Defoe  House.     Bellville,  124.
Watkins,  Joseph  J.,  Freight  Clerk  of  G.  T.  E.  W.     Moira,  11.
Wheadon,  Seth,  Woolen  Manufacturer.     Moira,  11.
Wilkins,  Charles,  Merchant,  Madock  P.  0.     Moira,  11.
Wonnacott,  John,  Clerk,  Brown's  Foundry.  S.  W.,  Bellville,  124 ;  Moira
chap.,  7.
BERLIN,  County  of  "Waterloo.
Davidson,  Wm.,  County  Clerk,  Postmaster,  Notary  Public,  etc.  Steward,
Wilson,  86  ;  King  Solomon's  chap.,  8.
BOWMANVILLE,  United  Counties  of  Northumberland  and  Durham.
Consaul,  P.  W.,  Grocer.     Secretary,  Jerusalem,  31.
Dixon,  Anthony,  Collector  of  Customs.  Jerusalem,  31 ;  St.  Andrew's  chap.,  4
'Fairburn,  J.  B.,  Agent  Montreal  Telegraph  Co.  and  Postmaster.    S.  W,
Jerusalem,  31.
Hopkins,  C.  A.,  Station  Master  G.  T.  E.  W.    Jerusalem,  31.
Lowe,  Geo.  H,  M.D.  and  Surgeon.     P.  M.,  Jerusalem,  31.
Manning,  Eobt.  S.,  Cabinet  Manufacturer.     P.  M.,  Jerusalem,  31.
Maynard,  Joseph,  Livery  Stable,  Grocery,  and  Saloon.    Jerusalem,  31.
Milne,  John,  Grocer  and  Spirit  Merchant.     P.  M.,  Jerusalem,  31.
Porter,  M.,  British  Saddlery  and  Harness  Warehouse.     J.  D.,  Jerusalem,  31.
Shaw,  Thomas,  Proprietor  Alma  Hotel.     Jerusalem,  31.
Stott,  John,  Wagon  and  Carriage  Manufacturer.  P.  S.  W.  and  S.  D.,  Jeru-
salem, 31.
BRAN TFOHD,  County  of  Brant.
Bussell,  Thomas  William,  Accountant  and  Auditor  B.  and  L.  H.  E.  W.  Sec-
retary, Doric,  121.
Curtis,  David,  Collector  of  Customs.  M.  W.,  Brant,  45;  St.  Andrew's
chap.,  4.
Doric  Lodge,  121,  was  chartered  July  12th,  a.l.  5860.  Regular  meetings,
Friday  on  or  before  full  moon.

--- Sayfa 95 ---
CANADA.  83
Downs,  Edward,  Painter.  S.  D.,  Doric,  121 ;  Royal  Arch  Mason,  Erie  com.,
Buffalo,  New  York.
Goodson,  J.  G.,  Conveyancer,  Commissioner,  etc.    Doric,  121.
Lautevbach,  Geo.,  Germania  Coffee  Rooms  and  Restaurant.     S.  D.,  Brant,  45.
Lemmon,  Henry,  Editor  and  Proprietor  Brantford  Courier.  Inner  Guard,
Doric,  121.
Lockhart,  James,  Gentleman.    Blenheim,  108.
Nimmo,  Charles  B.,  Deputy  Sheriff.     Secretary,  Brant,  45.
Poe,  Wm.,  Produce  Merchant.     P.  M.,  St.  George's,  9.
Pruyn,  M.  W.,  Merchant.     W.  M,  Doric,  121.
Stauss,  Albert,  Clothing  Merchant.     J.  D.,  Doric,  121.
Walsh,  Fred.,  Proprietor  Railway  House.     Steward,  Brant,  45.
Whiton,  Thomas  J.,  Station  Master,  B.  and  L.  H.  R.  W.     Brant,  45.
Wilson,  Grasme  Mercer,  Attorney  and  Solicitor.     Brant,  45.
Yardington,  James,  Veterinary  Surgeon.    Treasurer,  Doric,  121.
BROCKVILLII,  United  Counties  of  Leeds  and  Granville.
Brown,  A.  S.  Contractor.     Sussex,  5.
Buell,  J.  D.,  Barrister  at  Law,  Notary  Public,  etc.     S.  W.,  Sussex,  5.
Camm,  Thomas.  Merchant  Tailor.     W.  M.,  Sussex,  5 ;  G.  S.  of  G.  L.,  Canada.
Fitz  Simmons,  Wm.  May,  Architect  and  Builder.     P.  S.  D.,  Sussex,  5.
Griffin,  G.  R.,  Merchant.     Sussex,  5.
Holmes,  F.  M.,  Manager  Bank  of  Montreal.  P.  M.,  Sussex,  5  ;  Ogdens-
burg  chap.,  63,  New  York.      ,
Lawder,  James  M.,  Merchant.     P.  J.  W.,  Sussex,  5.
Lawless,  Edward,  Grocer,  Wine,  and  Spirit  Merchant.     Sussex,  5.
Leggo,  John,  Dentist,  Main  Street.     Sussex,  5.
Lewis,  Wm.  C,  Livery  and  Stage  Proprietor.     Inner  Guard,  Sussex,  5.
McElhinny,  John,  Manufacturer  and  Dealer  in  all  kinds  Cabinet  Furniture.
Treasurer,  Sussex,  5.
Phillips,  H.  C,  Proprietor  St.  Lawrance  Hall,  Railway  Street.    Sussex,  5.
Ross,  Samuel,  Dealer  in  Dry  Goods,  etc.  P.  M.,  Sussex,  5 ;  Sect.,  Sussex,  5  ;
P.  J.  G.  W.  of  Grand  Lodge  Canada.
Senkler,  Jr.,  E.  J.,  Barrister  at  Law.     Sussex,  5.
BKIGHTOW,  United  Counties  of  Northumberland  and  Durham.
Bettes,  Alex.,  Flour  Manufacturer.     P.  S.  and  J.  W.,  United,  29.
Bettes,  Harrison  C,  Gentleman.     P.  Treas.  and  J.  D.,  United,  29.
Bullock,  0.  B.,  Dry  Goods,  Groceries,  Liquors,  etc.    Inner  Guard,  United,  29.
Eyre,  John,  Attorney,' Solicitor,  aud  Notary  Public,  etc.     W.  M.,  United,  29.
Fife,  Amos  Edward,  Physician  and  Surgeon.     S.  W.,  United,  29;   Moira
chap.,  7.
Gross,  Samuel  P.,  Merchant.     S.  D.,  United,  29.
Simpson,  Wm.,  Deputy  Clerk,  Division  Court.     Treasurer,  United,  29.
Wellington,  Isaac  M.,  Baker,  Confectioner,  and  Grocer.     P.  M.,  United,  29.

--- Sayfa 96 ---
84  world's  masonic  eegistee.
CALEDONIA,  County  of  Haldimand.
Ohoate,  B.,  Agriculturalist.    P.  M.,  St.  Andrew's,  62.
Choate,  Zacheas  B.,  Agriculturalist.     P.  M.,  St.  Andrew's,  62.
Gallagher,  Daniel,  Carpenter  and  Joiner.    St.  Andrew's,  62.
Holden,  J.  B.,  Proprietor  of  Seneca  Flouring  Mills  and  Lumber  Merchant.
W.  M.,  St.  Andrew's,  62.
Holden,  "William  Whiting,  Agriculturalist.     Treasurer,  St.  Andrew's,  62.
Jackson,  "William,  Agriculturalist.     St.  Andrew's,  62.
McPherson,  "William,  Surgeon.     P.  M.,  St.  Andrew's,  62  ;  St.  John's,  35.
Palmer,  John,  Agriculturalist  and  Hotel  Keeper.  P.  and  Present  S.  W.,  St.
Andrew's,  62.
Pole,  B.  G.,  Merchant.     Secretary,  St.  Andrew's,  62.
CANESTOGA,  County  of  "Waterloo.
Perrine,  Mr.,  Flax  Dresser.    Alma,  72  ;  King  Solomon's  chap.,  8.
CHATHAM,  County  of  Kent.
Askin,  Charles  J.  S.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.  "W.  M.,  "Wellington,  46  ;  St.
John's  chap.,  6.
Atkinson,  Charles  B.,  Barrister  at  Law,  etc.    "Wellington,  46.
Campbell,  B.  M.,  Confectioner.    Pomeroy,  164,  Ohio.
Fish,  "Wm.  S.,  Lumber  Broker.  P.  M.,  Sylvan,  303,  N.  T. ;  "Western  Sun
chap.,  67,  N.  Y.
Glendinning,  Thomas,  Clerk,  Division  Court;  Lieutenant  at  the  battle  of
"Waterloo.     P.  S.  W.  and  Treas.,  Wellington,  46.
Larwill,  Edwin,  County  Begister.     "Wellington,  46.
McCrea,  Walter,  Barrister  at  Law.  P.  M-,  Wellington,  46 ;  Boyal  Arch
Mason.
McKeough,  John,  Hardware  Merchant.    J.  "W.,  "Wellington,  46.
McLean,  A.  D.,  Barrister,  Clerk  of  the  Peace,  Crown  and  County  Attorney.
"Wellington,  46.
Miller,  Miles,  Printer.     P.  Tyler,  "Wellington,  46.
Sissan,  Charles  Philip,  Agent  Bank  of  Upper  Canada.     Ionic,  25.
Smith,  J.,  Tanner,  Saddle  and  Harness  Manufacturer.     Wellington,  46.
Stodard,  E.,  Lumber  Dealer  and  Merchant,  Blenheim  P.  0.,  Kent  County.
"Wellington,  46.
Stone,  Thomas,  Dry  Goods,  Groceries,  and  Clothing.     Tyler,  "Wellington,  46.
Turnbull,  Geo.,  Merchant  Tailor.    "Wellington,  46.
Walden,  Wm.,  Track  Inspector  G.  W.  B.  B.     St.  George,  42.
"Walker,  David,  Proprietor  Boyal  Exchange  and  Befreshment  Booms  at
Depot.     Great  "Western,  47.
Waters,  Henry,  Agriculturalist  and  Lumberman.     Wellington,  46.
"Wellington  Lodge,  46,  was  chartered  a.l.  5852.  Begular  meetings,  Monday
on  or  before  full  moon.
CLIM'TOM',  County  of  Huron.
Brown,  Geo.,  Justice  of  the  Peace.     Secretary,  Clinton,  84.
Christopher,  James,  Betired  from  business.    Inner  Guard,  Clinton,  84.

--- Sayfa 97 ---
CANADA.  85
Coleman,  T.  T.,  M.D.  and  Coroner,  Harpurhay  P.  0.  Clinton,  84.
Cutten,  E.  L.,  Distiller,  Flour  and  Lumber  Manufacturer.  Alma,  72  ;  M.  B.
Master.
Doan,  0.  S.,  Leather  Manufacturer.    Treasurer,  Clinton,  84.
Fulton,  Geo.,  Hotel  Proprietor.    Clinton,  84.
Furkert,  G.  W.,  Saddle  and  Harness  Manufacturer.     Clinton,  84.
Jackson,  Thomas,  Merchant  Tailor.     S.  W.,  Clinton,  84.
Kerr,  Eev.  John  Wilton,  Licentiate  of  Church  of  England,  Diocese  of  Huron.
Initiated,  a.l.  5851 ;  St.  John's,  20  ;  Chaplain,  Clinton,  84.
King,  A.  R.,  Ornamental  Painter.    J.  W.,  Clinton,  84.
Ranee,  Samuel  H.,  Proprietor  of  Prince  of  "Wales  Hotel.    P.  M.,  Clinton,  84.
Head,  R.  H.,  Clerk  Division  Court,  Insurance  Agent,  etc.  W.  M.,  Clinton,  84;
Royal  Arch  Mason.
Richards,  Arthur  M.,  Station  Master  P.  and  L.  H.  R.  R.    S.  D.,  Clinton,  84.
Spooner,  Charles,  Butcher  and  Dealer  in  Stock.     J.  D.,  Clinton,  84.
Taylor,  Arthur,  Books,  Stationery,  etc.     Massachusetts  Lodge,  Boston.
Whitehead,  Charles.    M.  C,  Clinton,  84.
COLBOBETE,  United  Counties  of  Northumberland  and  Durham.
Alger,  Wm.,  Agriculturalist.     Colborne,  91.
Scott,  Joseph  Stewart.     P.  M.,  Colborne,  91.
Strong,  J.  S.,  Merchant.     W.  M.,  Colborne,  91.
COBOTJBG,  United  Counties  of  Northumberland  and  Durham.
Barron,  Fred.  William,  Head  Master  Grammar  School.  W.  M.,  St.  John's,
17 ;  St.  Andrew's  chap.,  4 ;  P.  G.  S.  W.,  Grand  Lodge.
Burnham,  Asa  A.,  County  Treasurer  and  Gentleman  Farmer.  P.  M.,  St.
John's,  17.
Burnside,  J.  T.,  Accountant  in  Bank  Toronto.  St.  John's,  17  ;  St.  John's
chap.,  6.
Floyd,  Wm.  H,  Proprietor  Cobourg  Star.     S.  W.,  St.  John's,  17.
Fortune,  J.  B.,  Sheriff  United  Counties.    J.  W.,  St.  John's,  17.
Harvey,  T.  R.,  Dry  Goods  and  Groceries.     Treasurer,  St.  John's,  17.
Reid,  Geo.,  M.D.     St.  John's,  17.
Van  Ingen,  A.  J.,  Auctioneer.    P.  M.,  St.  John's,  17.
Whitelaw,  John,  Copper  and  Tin  Smith,  and  Manager  Cobourg  Gas  Works.
S.  D.,  St.  John's,  17.
COLLIETGWOOD.
Reekie,  Geo.,  Ship-builder.    Manito,  90.
DELAWABE,  County  of  Middlesex.
Dutton,  John,  Merchant.  W.  M.,  St.  John's,  8  ;  ,W.  M.,  Mount  Bridges,  102 ;
Kilwinning  chap. ;  P.  G.  S.  of  Grand  Lodge.
Harris,  Charles  S.,  Proprietor  of  Western  Hotel.    Treasurer,  St.  John's,  81.
Ladd,  Calvin  Jewett,  Merchant.     S.  W.,  St.  John's,  81.
Livingston,  W.,  Justice  of  the  Peace,  Notary  Public  and  Land  Agent.  P.  J.
and  S.  W.,  St.  John's,  81.

--- Sayfa 98 ---
86  world's  masonic  register.
DUHDAS,  County  of  Wentworth.
Crow,  J.  J.,  Book-keeper.    J.  D.,  Valley,  100.
Irving,  William,  Mercantile  Clerk.     Tyler,  Valley,  100.
Latschaw,  Isaac,  Cabinet-maker.    Valley,  100.
MeMahan,  James,  Physician  and  Surgeon.     J.  W.,  Valley,  100.
Prosper,  Benjamin,  Professor  of  Languages.     Valley,  100.
Quackenbush,  James  P.,  Merchant  Tailor.     Secretary,  Valley,  100.
Smith,  James  P.,  Hardware  Clerk.     P.  S.  D.,  Valley,  100.
Sommerville,  James,  Proprietor  of  True  Banner.    Valley,  100.
Tunis,  John,  Agriculturalist,  Greensville  P.  0.     Valley,  100.
DUN TTVILLE,  County  of  Haldimand.
Barker,  Edgar,  Barrister  at  Law.     Amity,  32.
Braund,  William,  Stoves,  Tinware,  etc.     S.  W.,  Wellington,  52.
Brown,  Walter  S.,  Dry  Goods,  Groceries,  etc.  P.  and  Present  W.  M.,  Wel-
lington, 52.
Brownson,  A.,  Founder  and  Hardware  Merchant.     P.  M.,  Amity,  32.
Cormick,  Samuel,  Boot  and  Shoe  Dealer.     P.  M.,  Wellington,  52.
Hayward,  Charles,  Firm  of  Hayward  &  Schuyler,  Commission  Merchants,
Buffalo  and  Dunnville.     Wellington,  52.
Johnson,  J.  T.,  Grocer.     J.  W.,  Amity,  32.
McCrae,  W.  A.,  Collector  of  Customs.     P.  S.  W.,  Wellington,  52.
McSwain,  Captain  Daniel,  Tug  Boating,  Flour  and  Feed  Dealer.  P.  M.,
Wellington,  52.
Murdy,  Robt.,  Dunnville  Toll  Gate  and  Saloon  Keeper.  Treasurer,  Amity,  32.
Mylne,  John,  Dry  Goods,  Groceries,  etc.     Chaplain,  Wellington,  52.
Parry,  John,  Wagon  and  Carriage  Manufacturer  and  Justice  of  the  Peace.
P.  M.,  Amity,  32.
Penny,  Henry,  Boots,  Shoes,  and  Commission  Merchant.  P.  J.  W.  and
Treasurer,  Wellington,  52.
Price,  David,  Proprietor  of  Farmers'  Hotel.     S.  W.,  Amity,  32.
EXETEK,  County  of  Huron.
Carling,  Isaac,  Tanner  and  Currier.    Lebanon  Forest  Lodge,  U.  D.
Diamond,  William,  Bailiff.     W.  M.,  Lebanon  Forest  Lodge,  U.  D.
Doane,  Hadley,  Tanner  and  Currier.     Lebanon  Forest  Lodge,  U.  D.
Dunseith,  Hugh,  Merchant  Tailor.  J.  W.,  Lebanon  Forest  Lodge,  U.  D.,
late  K.  T.,  396,  County  of  Tyrone,  Ireland.
Gidley,  Thomas,  Carpenter  and'  Joiner.  Secretary,  Lebanon  Forest  Lodge,
U.  D.
Wilson,  Hiram,  Merchant.     Treasurer,  Lebanon  Forest  Lodge,  U.  D.
FEAITKPOED,  County  of  Hastings.
Graham,  George  S.,  Agriculturalist.  W.  M.,  Franck  Lodge,  127;  P.  7.  S.,
Moira  chap.,  7.

--- Sayfa 99 ---
CANADA.  81
G-ALT,  County  of  Waterloo.
Andrews,  Gordon,  Boot  and  Shoe  Dealer.    J.  D.,  Alma,  72.
Atwood,  J.  B.,  Barrel  Manufacturer.     Inner  Quard,  Alma,  72.
Ball,  Abram  T.  H.,  Barrister  at  Law  and  Notary  Public.  W.  M.,  Alma,  72  ;
St.  John's  chap.,  6 ;  Richard  Cceu?  De  Lion  com.
Bish,  Philip,  Mercantile  Salesman.     Alma,  72.
Davidson,  John,  Postmaster  and  Banker.     P.  M.,  Alma,  72.
Durand,  Charles  Alfred,  Barrister  and  Notary  Public.     Alma,  72.
Fisher,  T.  S.,  Merchant.     Secretary,  Alma,  72  ;  Hiram  chap.,  2.
Jaffray,  James,  Bookbinder  and  Printer.  Initiated  September  4th,  a.l.  5824,
in  Stirling,  30,  Scotland ;  P.  S.  W.,  St.  David's,  554,  England ;  now  a  member
of  Alma,  72.
Lutz,  Morris  C,  Iron  Founder  and  Machinist.     Alma,  72.
Nelles,  R.  F.,  Revenue  Inspector.     S.  W.,  Alma,  72.
Peck,  Thomas,  Maltster.  P.  M.,  Prince  Edwin's,  75,  Suffolk,  England ;  now
a  member  of  Alma,  72.
Robinson,  William,  Mayor,  Grocer,  Miller  and  Woolen  Manufacturer.  Alma,
72.
GLBNCOB,  County  of  Middlesex.
McCrae,  Duncan,  Postmaster  and  Merchant.     Albion,  80.
GODERICH,  County  of  Huron.
Adair,  David,  Merchant.  W.  M.,  Goderich  Union,  720,  E.  R.,  Mark  and
P.  M.  Mason.
Bush,  A.  F.,  Grocer.     Medina,  336,  N.  Y.
Cameron,  M.  C,  Barrister  and  Mayor  of  Goderich.     S.  W.,  Maitland,  112.
Davis,  George  N.,  Stoves,  Tinware,  etc.    Inner  Guard,  Maitland,  112.
Donogh,  Andrew,  Innkeeper.     Treasurer,  Goderich  Union,  720,  E.  R.
Donogh,  Robert,  Innkeeper.     Goderich  Union,  720,  E.  R.
Goderich  Union  Lodge,  No.  720,  E.  R.,  was  chartered  a.d.  1843,  a.l.  5843.
Regular  meetings,  Thursday  on  or  before  full  moon.
Lewis,  Ira,  Barrister  and  Crown  Attorney.     Steward,  Maitland,  112.
McLeod,  John,  retired  from  business.     Tyler,  Goderich  Union,  720,  E.  R.
'     Owen,   Edwin  Robert,  Wholesale   and  Retail  Grocer  and  Liquor  Dealer.
Steward,  Maitland,  112.
Rumball,  George,  Forwarding  and  Commission  Merchant  and  Steamboat  Pro-
prietor.   Maitland,  112.
Sinclair,  James  S.,  Solicitor,  Attorney,  etc.    Secretary,  Maitland,  112.
Story,  William,  Foundery  and  Hardware.     W.  M.,  Maitland,  112."
Trainer,  Bernard,  High  Bailiff  and  Market  Clerk.     S.  D.,  Maitland,  112.
Treleaven,  William  C,  Marble  Dealer.     S.  W.,  Goderich  Union,  720,  E.  R.
Trueman,  George  M.,  Auctioneer,  Commission  Merchant,  etc.  P.  M.,  Mait-
land, 112.
Walsh,  Samuel  S.,  Collector  of  Customs.    Treasurer,  Maitland,  112.

--- Sayfa 100 ---
88  world's  masonic  register.
GTJELFH,  County  of  Wellington.
Beaty,  Thomas  K.,  Jeweler  and  Watchmaker.  Wellington,  33.  and  Eeho-
boam,  65.
Cross,  James,  Mercantile  Clerk.     J.  W.  Wellington,  33.
Hayward,  William,  Druggist  and  Apothecary.     W.  M.,  Wellington,  33.
Hutchinson,  C.  P.  P.,  American  Express  Agent,  Justice  of  Peace,  Notary
Public,  etc.     Treasurer,  Wellington,  33.
Jones,  Eobert,  Proprietor  of  American  Hotel.     Wellington,  33.
Mills,  William  Henry,  Iron  Foundry.    Secretary,  Wellington,  33.
Walker,  James  Eobert,  Clerk  of  American  Hotel.     Wellington;  33.
HAMILTON,  County  of  Wentworth.
Ayers,  Samuel  P.,  Lost  Baggage  and  Freight  Agent,  G.  W.  E.  W.  P.  M.,
St.  John's,  20  ;  St.  John's  chap.,  3.
Barker,  John,  Pattern-designer.     Barton,  6.
Barker,  Wright,  Employee,  G.  W.  E.  W.     Barton,  6.
Bauer,  Henry,  Brewer  and  Saloon  Keeper.  Steward,  Strict  Observance,  27 ;
Hiram  chap.,  2.
Beazely,  Thomas,  City  Clerk.  Auditor,  Barton,  6  ;  G.  M.  1st  Veil,  Hiram
chap,  2.
Brownlee,  David,  Machinist,  G.  W.  E.  W.     St.  John's,  40.
Bruce,  Francis  C,  Dealer  in  Garden  and  Field  Seeds.   Strict  Observance,  27.
Cozens,  Geo.  H.,  Merchant  Tailor.     St.  John's,  40.
Dingwett,  James,  Chemist  and  Druggist.   St.  John's,  40  ;  St.  John's  chap.,  3.
Downie,  David,  Bailiff  Division  Court.     St.  Clair,  135.
Duggan,  Thomas,  Physician  and  Surgeon.  P.  M.,  Acacia,  61 ;  P.  1st  Prin.
Z.,  Hiram  chap.,  2 ;  P.  G.  2d  Prin.  H.  G.  C.  Grand  Supt.  Grand  chap.  Hamilton
District.
Durdan,  William,  Locomotive  Engineer.  Inner  G.,  St.  John's,  40;  St.
John's  chap.,  6.
Eastwood,  John,  Books  and  Stationery.  Secretary,  Barton,  6 ;  G.  M.  3d
Veil,  Hiram,  2.
Ferguson,  Peter,  Gentleman.     Steward,  Strict  Observance,  27.
Forsyth,  George,  Asst.  Supt.,  G.  W.  B.  W.     Barton,  6.
Gittius,  James  H.,  Salesman.    Barton,  6  ;  Hiram  chap.,  2.
Hall,  Jr.,  John,  G.  W.  E.  W.     Strict  Observance,  27.
Harris,  Thomas  B.,  Grand  Secretary  of  Grand  Lodge  from  its  organization,
a.l.  5855;  Grand  Scribe  E.,  Grand  chap.,  from  its  organization,  a.l.  5857;
P.  M.,  St.  John's  Lodge,  40;  Past  1st  Prin.  Z.  of  St.  John's  chap.,  6;  Past
Eminent  Commander  and  1st  Capt.,  Godfrey  De  Bouillon  encpt ,  E.  E.
Henderson,  David,  Proprietor  Station  Hotel.     St.  Mary's,  117,  Scotland.
Henderson,  John  S.,  Book-keeper  and  Cashier.  Secretary,  Strict  Observance,
27  ;  Scribe  N.,  Hiram  chap.,  2.
Irwin,  William,  Grocer.    W.  M.,  Barton,  6  ;  Scribe  N.,  St.  John's  chap.,  6.
James,  George,  Merchant.     J.  W.,  Strict  Observance,  27.
Jeffrey,  William,  Mechanical  Department,  G.  W.  E.  W.     Made  in  Union,  7.
Jones,  John  B.,  Foreman  Machine  shop,  G.  W.  E.  W.    Barton,  6.

--- Sayfa 101 ---
CANADA.  89
Knox,  George,  Engineer.    Barton,  6.
Liley,  John  T.,  Locomotive  Engineer  and  Machinist,  G.  W.  E.  W.  J.  D.,
Barton,  6  ;  Pursuivant,  Hiram  chap.,  2.
Magill,  Charles,  Dry  Goods  and  Groceries.  P.  M.,  Barton,  6 ;  P.  1st  Prin.
Z.,  Hiram  chap.,  2 ;  Genesee  com.,  10,  Lockport,  New  York ;  P.  S.  G.  W.,
Grand  Lodge ;  Dist.  Dep.  G.  M.,  G.  L.  Hamilton  District.
McOraken,  Thomas,  Clerk  in  Government  Bank.  W.  M.,  St.  John's,  40 ;
Scribe  E.,  St.  John's  chap.,  6  ;  Assistant  Grand  Secretary,  Grand  Lodge.
Mclntyre,  J.  G,  Foreman  Boiler-maker,  G.  W.  B.  W.    J.  D.,  St.  John's,  40.
McLanglan,  Alex.,  Fireman,  G.  W.  E.  W.     St.  John's,  40.
Michael,  William,  Upholsterer,  G.  W.  E.  W.     St.  John's,  40.
Murton,  John  W.,  General  Agent  and  Commission  Merchant,  corner  of  King
and  Hudson  streets.    Secretary,  St.  John's,  40;  P.  S.,  St.  John's  chap.,  6.
Pringle,  William  Watson,  Mercantile  Salesman.  J.  D.,  Strict  Observance,
27  ;  Scribe  E.,  Hiram  chap.,  2.
Eichmond,  James,  Clerk,  G.  W.  E.  W.    Steward,  Barton,  6.
Eobinson,  John,  Engineer,  G.  W.  E.  W.     St.  Mark's,  105.
Scoales,  Howard  E.,  Purser  of  the  Steamer  "  Kingston."    Organist,  Barton,  6.
Shaler,  M.  F.,  Grocer.  S.  W.,  Barton,  6  ;  St.  John's  chap.,  G  ;  Buffalo  chap.,
71,  N.  Y. ;  Lake  Erie  com.,  20,  N.  Y. ;  Charter  Member  Godfrey  De  Bouillon
com.
Smith,  Charles  W.,  Boiler-maker,  G.  W.  R.  W.  St.  John's,  40;  Hiram
chap.,  2.
Smith,  Charles  W.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.     St.  John's,  40  ;  Hiram  chap.,  2.
Waddell,  Johnston,  Mercantile  Salesman.  J.  W.,  Barton,  6 ;  P.  S.,  Hiram
chap.,  2.
Walker,  John,  Blacksmith,  G.  W.  E.  W.  and  Caledonian  Railway.  St.
John's,  40 ;  and  Lodge  354.
HYDE  PAKE,  County  of  East  Middlesex.
Hanson,  Henry,  Physician  and  Surgeon.     S.  W.,  Beaver,  83.
INGEKSOLL,  County  of  Oxford.
Allen,  George  W.,  Machinist.    W.  M.,  King  Hiram,  37.
Allison,  Wm.  J.,  Butcher.     Inner  Guard,  St.  John's,  68.
Bolton,  Eichard,  Lumber  Manufacturer.     King  Hiram,  37.
Bowers,  Thomas,  Surgeon  and  Physician.     St.  John's,  68.
Brice,  Geo.  B.,  Blacksmith.     Inner  Guard,  King  Hiram,  37.
Galliford,  John,  Boot  and  Shoe  Manufacturer.     W.  M.,  St.  John's,  68 ;  Most
Excellent  Master.
Hearn,  Henry,  Proprietor  Eoyal  Exchange  Hotel.     Secretary,  St.  John's,  68.
McCaughey,  James  M.,  Barrister  at  Law,  Notary  Public,  etc.  Maple  Leaf,  103.
Ollerenshaw,  Mark,  Merchant.     King  Hiram,  37.
Springer,  W.,  Homoeopathic  Physician.     St.  John's,  68.
Taylor,  Henry,  Notary.  Public  and  Conveyancer.    J.  W.,  King  Hiram,  37.
Vine,  James,  Commissioner  B.  E.,  Conveyancer,  etc.    P.  M.,  King  Hiram,  37.
Woodcock,  Rolf  Alex.,  Merchant.    S.  W.,  St.  John's,  68  ;  Hiram  chap.,  2.

--- Sayfa 102 ---
90  world's  masonic  registeii.
KINGSTON,  County  of  Frontenac.
Bartlett,  Francis,  Builder.     St.  John's,  3 ;  Ancient  Frontenac  chap.,  1.
Benedict,  R.  0.,  Proprietor  Herald  and  Advertiser,  corner  King  and  Brock
Streets.     Cataraqui,  92.
Blondheim,  S.  H.,  Blondheim  Saloon,  110  Brock  Street.  P.  J.  W.,  Cataraqui,
92  ;  P.  S.,  Cataraqui  chap.,  12  ;  G.  Pursuivant,  Grand  Lodge  of  Canada.
Burge,  William,  School  Teacher  in  Royal  Canadian  Rifle  Regiment.  St.
John's, '3.
Deans,  John  G.,  Druggist,  King  Street.     Cataraqui,  92.
Dumble,  Henry,  Confectioner  and  Pastry  Dealer,  corner  Brock  and  Welling-
ton Streets.     S.  W.  Cataraqui,  92  ;  3d  Prin.  J.,  Cataraqui  chap.,  12.
Fowler,  S.  D.,  First  Clerk  Her  Majesty's  Customs.  P.  M.  and  S.  W.,  St.
John's,  3  ;  P.  1st  Prin.  Z.,  Ancient  Frontenac  chap.,  1 ;  Past  B.  C.  and  Regis-
trar, Hugh  De  Payen's  encpt. ;  P.  S.  G.  Warden,  P.  G.  2d  Prin.  H.  Grand
chap. ;  Provincial  G.  Registrar,  Grand  encpt.
Froiland,  J.  D.,  Gold  and  Silver  Smith.     Steward,  Cataraqui,  92.
Henderson,  James  Alex.,  Barrister  at  Law.  Past  and  Present  W.  M.,  St.
John's,  13 ;  Past  1st  Prin.  Z.,  Ancient  Frontenac  chap.,  1 ;  P.  E.  C,  Hugh  De
Payen's  encpt. ;  P.  G.  S.  W.,  Grand  Lodge  ;  G.  T.,  Grand  chap. ;  Past  Deputy
Grand  Commander  of  Provincial  Grand  Conclave ;  Past  Sub.  Prior  of  Supreme
Grand  Conclave,  England  and  Wales ;  and  Rep.  of  said  body  to  General  Grand
Encampment  of  U.  S.
La  Serre,  George  Fred.,  Wholesale  and  Retail  Chemist  and  Druggist,  76  King
Street.  P.  M.,  Royal  Somerset  House  and  Inverness,  4,  England;  Treasurer,
St.  John's,  13  ;  P.  1st  Prin.  Z.  and  P.  S.,  Ancient  Frontenac  chap.,  1 ;  Eminent
C,  Hugh  De  Payen's  encpt. ;  P.  G.  Steward,  Grand  Lodge,  England ;  Dist.
Deputy  G.  M.,  Central  District  Canada ;  G.  Steward,  Grand  chap. ;  Second
Capt.  and  Treasurer,  Provincial  Grand  Conclave.
Macdonald,  C.  D.,  Accountant.  S.  D.,  Cataraqui,  92  ;  Ancient  Frontenac
chap.,  1.
Noel,  John  V.,  Insurance  Agent,  Accountant,  Notary  Public,  etc.  W.  M.,
Cataraqui,  92 ;  Zerubbabel,  15,  Ga. ;  initiated,  a.l.  5842,  in  Savannah,  Ga.,
U.S.
Pechell,  Edward  K.  C,  Ensign  Royal  Canadian  Rifles.  St.  John's,  3 ;  Ancient
Frontenac  chap.,  1.
Simpson,  Wm.  B.,  Collector  of  Her  Majesty's  Customs.  P.  M.,  Sussex,  5;
P.  1st  Prin.  Z.,  Ancient  Frontenac  chap.,  1 ;  Expert  in  Hugh  De  Payen's
encpt. ;  Deputy  Grand  Master,  Canada  ;  P.  Supt.  of  Royal  Arch  Masonry,
Central  District;  Provincial  G.  V.  Chancellor  and  Register  of  Provincial
Grand  Conclave  of  Canada.
Somerville,  Wm.,  Mercantile  Salesman.  Secretary,  Cataraqui,  92  ;  Scribe  B.
Cataraqui  chap.,  12.
Spankenberg,  George,  Gold  and  Silver  Smith  and  Jeweller,  30  King  Street.
Cataraqui,  92.
Spike,  James,  Agriculturalist  and  Dealer  in  Lumber,  Land  Agent,  etc.  Albion,
109  ;  and  St.  John's,  3.
Stenson,  Cornelius,  Proprietor  City  Hotel,  Princess  Street.    St.  John's,
Ancient  Frontenac  chap.,  1.

--- Sayfa 103 ---
CANADA.  91
St.  John's  Lodge,  No.  3,  meets  first  Thursday  each  month.
Strong,  Edward,  Sculptor.     St.  John's,  3.
Sutherland,  John,  Provincial  Store  Keeper.  P.  J.  and  S.  W.,  St.  John's,  3  ;
Dist.  Deputy  Grand  Secretary,  Central  District,  Canada.
"Will,  John,  Orderly  Room  Clerk,  Royal  Canadian  Rifle  Regiment.  St.
John's,  3.
KOMOKA,  County  of  "West  Middlesex.
Betts,  "William,  Proprietor  Junction  Hotel.     Initiated  in  Pythagoras,  654,
E.  R.  in  Coveyra,  Corfu,  Greece,  now  a  member  of  St.  John's,  81.
Drake,  Samuel,  Merchant  and  Insurance  Agent.     St.  John's,  81.
Elson,  J.  B.,  Teacher.     St.  John's,  81.
Smith,  Thomas,  Bailiff  and  Parmer.     St.  John's,  81.
LOM'DOM',  County  of  Middlesex.
Barnard,  P.  C,  Auctioneer  and  General  Commission  Agent.  P.  J.  W.,  St.
George's,  42,  now  a  member  of  Kilwinning,  64.
Bastable,  James,  Machinist,  G.  W.  R.  W.     Inner  Guard,  St.  George's,  42.
Beddome,  P.  B.,  Private  Banker  and  General  Agent.     St.  John's,  20.
Bennett,  James  M.,  Proprietor  Tecumseh  House.  P.  M.,  St.  John's,  209,
I.  R.;  now  member  of  St.  George's,  42 ;  P.  2d  Prin.  H.,  St.  George's  chap.,  5.
Bennett,  Thomas,  Machinist,  G.  W.  R.  "W.     St.  George's,  42.
Bostwick,  E.  F.,  Clerk,  Tecumseh  House.  St.  George's,  42 ;  St.  George's
chap  ,  5.
Bulwer,  Thomas,  Book-keeper.     Kilwinning,  64.
Burdett,  George,  Locomotive  Engineer,  G.  "W.  R.  "W.     St.  George's,  42.
Chambers,  "W.  G.,  Grocer.  P.  M.  and  Secretary,  Kilwinning,  64;  P.  2d
Prin.  H.,  Kilwinning  chap.,  10  ;  P.  R.,  Cceur  de  Lion  encpt.
Chapman,  A.  T.,  Hardware  Dealer.     Kilwinning,  64;  Kilwinning  chap.,  10.
Davies,  C.  L.,  Civil  Engineer,  Architect,  and  Provincial  Land  Surveyor.  Kil-
winning, 64 ;  C.  L.,  Cceur  de  Lion  encpt.  .
Drullard,  Robert,  Traveling  Agent.     St.  John's,  20.
Dugen,  D.,  Locomotive  Dept.,  G.  "W.  R.  "W.     Kilwinning,  64.
Flock,  James  H,  Barrister  at  Law.  S.  W.,  Kilwinning,  64 ;  P.  P.  S.,  St.
George's  chap.,  5.
Foote,  John,  "Wholesale  Tea  Merchant.     St.  John's,  20.
Glass,  David,  Ex-Mayor  of  London.     Kilwinning,  64.
Gordon,  "William,  Merchant.  Treasurer,  St.  John's,  20 ;  Treasurer,  St.  John's
chap.,  3.
Hamilton,  Alex.,  "Wholesale  and  Retail  Dealer  in  Dry  Goods,  Dundas  Street.
St.  John's,  20.
Harrison,  John,  Dry  Goods  Merchant.  "W.  M.,  Kilwinning,  64 ;  P.  P.  S.,
St.  George's  chap.,  5.
Heathfield,  Edwin,  "Wholesale  Druggist,  134  Dundas  Street.  "W.  M.,  St.
John's,  20 ;  1st  Prin.  Z.,  St.  John's  chap.,  3  ;  G.  Registrar,  Grand  Lodge ;  G.
Scribe  N.  Grand  chap.
King,  Lyman  S.,  Dealer  in  Pianos,  Melodeons,  etc.     St.  George's,  42.
Knight,  Caleb,  Locomotive  Dept.,  G.  W.  R.  W.    St.  George's,  42.
Love,  John,  Locomotive  Engineer,  G.  "W.  R.  "W.    Kilwinning,  64.
7

--- Sayfa 104 ---
92  world's  masonic  register.
Mackie,  Thomas,  Bank  British  North  America.  W.  M.,  St.  George's,  42 ;
3d  Prin.  J.,  St.  George's  chap.,  5  ;  Grand  Steward,  Grand  Lodge.
Marshall,  Wm.,  Locomotive  Dept.,  G.  W.  R.  \V.     St.  George's,  42.
McCully,  Daniel,  Clerk.     St.  George's,  42.
McDonald,  Alex.,  Locomotive  Engineer,  G.  W.  B.  W.     St.  George's,  42.
Mclntyre,  Alex.,  Boiler-maker,  G.  W.  R.  W.     St.  George's,  42.
Morehouse,  H.  D.,  Telegraph  Agent.     P.  M.,  St.  George's,  42.
Moule,  Stephen  A.,  Grocer,  etc.,  Albion  Buildings,  Richmond  Street.  Kil-
winning, 64.
Muir,  W.,  Merchant.  P.  M.,  Kilwinning,  64 ;  H.  P.  Kilwinning  chap.,  10 ;
B.  Commander,  Cceur  de  Lion  encpt.
Noble  &  Lewis,  Painters  and  Paper  Hangers.    Members  Kilwinning,  64.
Oxnard,  George  A.,  Ticket  Agent,  G.  T.  R.  W.     J.  D.,  St.  John's,  20.
Porteous,  David,  Locomotive  Engineer,  G.  W.  R.  W.     Kilwinning,  64.
Price,  John,  Locomotive  Fireman,  G.  W.  R.  W.     Kilwinning,  64.
Rich,  C.  G.,  Druggist.    Kilwinning,  64;  St.  George's  chap.,  5.
Robertson,  James,  Tailor.     St.  George's,  42.
Robinson,  Edward,  Grocer.     Kilwinning,  64.
Sharman,  John  D.,  London  Post-office.     Secretary,  St.  John's,  20.
Taylor,  John,  Undertaker.  St.  George's,  42 ;  Assistant  P.  S.,  St.  George's
chap.,  5.
Waterman,  H.,  Clothing  Merchant,  Commercial  Block,  Dnndas  Street.  St
George's,  42.
Weir,  James,  Druggist.     Secretary,  St.  George's,  42.
Whittaker,  James,  Freight  Dept.,  G.  W.  R.  W.     Kilwinning,  64.
Wilson,  Captain  Thomson,  Late  Barrack  Master  of  London.  P.  M.,  Kilwin-
ning, 64 ;  1st  Prin.  Z.,  St.  George's  chap.,  5 ;  P.  E.  C,  Richard  Cceur  de  Lion
encpt. ;  P.  Dist.  Deputy  G.  M.,  Canada ;  P.  G.  1st  Prin.  Z.,  Grand  chap.,
Canada ;  1st  Capt.  Provincial  Grand  Encampment  of  England ;  1st  Grand
Standard  Bearer,  Grand  Conclave  of  England.
Wylie,  J.,  Locomotive  Dept.,  G.  W.  R.  W.    J.  W.,  Kilwinning,  64.
NEWBURY,  County  of  Middlesex.
Adair,  Robert,  Boot  and  Shoe  Manufacturer.    J.  W.,  Albion,  80.
Bracken,  John  C,  Architect  and  Builder.     S.  W.,  Albion,  80.
Campbell,  Cameron  J.,  Butcher.     W.  M.,  Albion,  80.
Deming,  Prosper,  Founder  and  Machinist.     M.  of  Ceremonies,  Albion,  80.
Dobie,  John,  Proprietor  Commercial  Hotel.     J.  D.,  Albion,  80.
Haight,  S.  A.,  Dry  Goods,  etc.     P.  Secretary,  Albion,  80.
Kier,  A.  R.,  Lumber  Manufacturer.  P.  M.,  Eagle  Chain,  Scotland,  now
member  of  Albion,  80.
McNichol,  David,  Engineer.     Albion,  80.
Purdy,  Thomas  F.,  Veneer  Manufacturer.     Albion,  80.
Smith,  Geo.  J.,  Merchant  and  Commissioner  in  Queen's  Bench.  Treasurer,
Albion,  80.
Story,  Thomas,  Saloon  Keeper.    Tyler,  Albion,  80.
Thompson,  Robt.,  Proprietor  Union  Hotel.     P.  S.  W.  and  S.  D.,  Albion,  80.
Wilson,  Andrew,  Township  Clerk.     Secretary,  Albion,  80.
Wright,  A.  A.,  Merchant.     P.  M.,  Albion,  80.

--- Sayfa 105 ---
CANADA.  93
NEWCASTLE,  United  Counties  of  Northumberland,  and  Durham.
Bigelow,  Levi,  retired  from  business.  Initiated  in  St.  John's  Lodge,  16,  E.  R.,
Toronto,  a.l.  5814;  P.  M.,  Jerusalem,  31,  and  Durham,  66;  Exalted  in  St.
John's  chap.,  16,  Toronto,  a.l.  5815 ;  P.  P.  S.,  King  and  Scribe ;  Knight  of
Red  Cross ;  P.  G.  Pursuivant,  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  of  Canada.
Brock,  Joseph,  Dry  Goods,  Groceries,  etc.    S.  D.,  Durham,  66.
Brodie,  Jr.,  Thomas,  Proprietor  Brodie  House.    Jerusalem,  31.
Parncomb,  Fred.,  Collector,  Her  Majesty's  Customs.     S.  W.,  Durham,  66.
Mcintosh,  Wm.,  Gentleman.  P.  S.  D.,  Durham,  66;  St.  John's  chap.,  75,
Scotch  Register.
Shaw,  Richard  J.,  Nurseryman.     Durham,  66.
"Wilkinson,  Richard  T.,  Barrister  and  Attorney  at  Law.     Durham,  66.
Wilmot,  Samuel,  Clerk  Division  Court  and  General  Provision  Dealer.  W.  M.,
Durham,  66.
PARIS,  County  of  Brant.
Bullock.  Joseph,  Mercantile  Salesman.     J.  W.,  St.  John's,  82.
Capron,  Hiram,  Agriculturalist.  Initiated  Manchester,  N.  H.,  a.l.  5818 ;
P.  M.,  St.  John's,  82  ;  Ontario  Temple  chap.,  N.  Y.
Capron,  Horace,  Agriculturalist.     Treasurer,  St.  John's,  82.
Chase,  Jacob,  Proprietor  International  Hotel,  at  Depot.  P.M.,  St.  John's,  82 ;
St.  John's  chap.,  3.
Dickson,  David  R.,  Notary  Public,  Insurance  and  General  Agent.  Sect'y,
St.  John's,  82.
Gleason,  Lyman,  Hotel-keeper.     St.  John's  82  ;  Western  Star  chap.,  N.  Y.
Hosker,  Edward,  Station  Master  of  B.  and  L.  H.  R.  W.     St.  John's,  82.
Logan,  Patrick,  Lumber  Merchant  and  Produce  Dealer.   S.  W  ,  St.  John's,  82.
Nisbet,  Robert,  Books  and  Stationery.  Initiated  St.  Paul's,  124,  Auburn,
N.  Y.,  a.l.  5840  ;  R.  A.  M.,  Salem  town  com.,  16,  N.  Y.
Wallace,  Wm.,  Station  Master  of  G.  W.  R.  W.    St.  John's,  82.
POET  HOPE,  County  of  Durham.
Chisholm,  Harvey  F.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.     P.  Secretary,  Hope,  114.
Church,  W.  Y.,  Proprietor  Hasting  House.     P.  M.,  Prince  Edward's,  18.
Crossen,  Thomas,  Tailor.  P.  J.  and  S.  W.,  Ontario,  26  ;  made  R.  A.  M.
in  Comber,  Down  Co.,  Ireland.
Fogerty,  Richard,  Painter,  John  St.     J.  W.,  Hope,  114.
Gould,  Frank  E.,  Freight  Agent  of  P.  H.  L.  and  B.  R.  W.  Sect'y,  Hope,
114 ;  Dist.  Deputy  G.  Secretary,  Ontario  Dist.
Gray,  Joseph,  Accountant.    Hope,  114.
Hall,  Joseph  B.,  Gentleman  Farmer.  P.  M.,  Trent,  38 ;  W.  M.,  Ontario,  26 ;
Ancient  Frontenac  chap.,  1 ;  Dist.  Deputy  G.  M.,  Ontario  district.
Hastings,  Thomas  Warren,  Restaurant.  P.  M.,  Ontario,  26  ;  initiated,  a.l.
5830,  Northumberland,  England.
McCaa,  James,  Boot  and  Shoe  Manufacturer.  J.  W.,  Ontario,  26.  Made
R.  A.  Mason,  Comber,  Down  Co.,  Ireland.
McLeod,  Duncan,  Insurance  Agent.     P.  M.,  Ontario,  26.
Mulligan,  John,  Hardware  Merchant.    Treasurer,  Hope,  114.

--- Sayfa 106 ---
94  -world's  masonic  register.
Ridout,  Thomas,  Civil  Engineer.     W.  M.,  Hope,  114 ;  St.  Andrew's  chap.,  4;
Geoffrey  de  St.  Aldemar  encpt.
Taylor,  H.  G.,  Master  Mechanic  of  B.  H.  L.  and  B.  R.  R.    Hope,  114.
POKT  STANLEY,  County  of  Elgin.
Batt,  John,  Merchant.    J.  W.,  St.  Mart's,  94.
Burgess,  Wm.  B.,  Mercantile  Clerk.     S.  D.,  St.  Mark's,  94.
Child,  Mathew,  Collector  of  Customs.     P.  Sect'y,  St.  Mark's,  94.
Porknall,  B.  G.,  Port  Bruce,  P.  0.,  Forwarding  and  Commission  Merchant
P.  S.  W.,  St.  Mark's,  94.
Given,  "Wm.,  Blacksmith.     S.  W.,  St.  Mark's,  94.
Hemphill,  John,  Surveyor  of  Customs.    Tyler,  St.  Marks,  94.
Shepard,  Samuel,  Commission  Merchant.     W.  M.,  St.  Mark's,  94.
Yerington,  H.  M.,  Commission  Merchant.     St.  Mark's,  94.
PEESCOTT,  United  Counties  of  Leeds  and  Granville.
Akin,  W.  S.,  Merchant  and  Postmaster,  and  Merchant  in  Edwardsburgh.
Central,  110.
Brouse,  Wm.  H.,  A.  M.  Physician  and  Surgeon.    J.  W.,  Central,  110.
Crichton,  John,  Brewer.     Central,  110.
Ellis,  Win.,  Brewer  and  Contractor  of  Public  Works.  Central,  110  ;  Carleton
chap.,  16.
Fox,  George  B.,  Groceries,  Hardware,  Dry  Goods,  Liqnors,  etc.   Central,  110.
Geralds,  Wm.,  Custom  House.     P:  S.  W.,  Central,  110.
Hawley,  J.  S.,  U.  S.  Consular  Agent,  Forwarding  Commission  Agent,  etc.
Central,  110.
Hynes,  C.  J.,  Editor  and  Proprietor  Messenger.     Steward,  Central,  110.
Lyon,  Robert,  Barrister  at  Law.  J.  W.,  Corinthian,  59  ;  Chaplain,  Cen-
tral, 110.
Mallory,  N  B.,  Carriage  and  Ornamental  Painter.  Central,  110;  Ogdens-
burgh  chap.,  63.
Northrup,  Manuel,  Proprietor  Commercial  Hotel.  P.  M.,  Central,  110 ;  2d
Prin.  H.,  Carleton  chap.,  16.
Ormiston,  Wm.,  Custom  House,  Lieutenant  and  Adjutant  of  Prescott  Rifles.
Director  of  Ceremonies,  Central,  110.
Plumb.  Charles,  Captain  and  Steamboat  Owner.  Central,  110 ;  Ogdensbnrgl
chap.,  63,  N.  Y.
Purkis,  Isaac  D.,  Forwarding  and  Commission  Merchant,  Insurance  Agent,
Flour  Dealer,  etc.     S.  D.,  Central,  110  ;  Carleton  chap.,  16.
Smith,  Wm.  H.,  Bookseller  and  Stationer.     Central,  110.
Twomley,  George,  Surveyor  of  Customs.  P.  S.  W.,  St.  Mark's,  105 ;  Cen-
tral, 110  ;  Carleton  chap.,  16.
Wiser,  J.  P.,  Distiller.     S.  D.,  Central,  110  ;  Carleton  chap  ,  16.
SAHUTA,  County  of  Lampton.
Black,  Hugh,  Mercantile  Salesman.  Secretary,  Victoria,  56 ;  P.  S.,  Wa-
wanosh  chap.,  15 ;  Knight  of  Red  Cross.
Clark,  William  B.,  Merchant  and  Forwarder.    Victoria,  56.

--- Sayfa 107 ---
CANADA.  95
Fisher,  Alfred,  Justice  of  Peace  and  Postmaster.    Victoria,  56.
Forsyth,  Thomas,  Clerk  of  Division  Court  and  Commissioner  of  Queen's
Bench.     P.  M.,  Victoria,  56.
Fowler,  S.  P.,  Butcher.     Victoria,  56.
Glass,  George,  Locomotive  Fireman.     Kilwinning,  64 ;  Wawanosh  chap.,  15.
Grout,  H.  M.,  Civil  Engineer.     Victoria,  56.
Jamison,  "William  M.,  Paymaster  of  G.  T.  R.  W.  St.  Andrew's,  16 ;  St.
Andrew's  chap.,  4 ;  Geoffrey  de  St.  Aldemar  encpt.
Johnson,  Thomas  W.,  M.D.    Victoria,  56.
Mackenzie,  J.  &  C,  Hardware  Dealers.    Victoria,  56.
McAvoy,  John,  Proprietor  of  Western  Hotel.     Victoria,  56.
O'Brien,  Dennis  Cornelius,  Collector  of  Her  Majesty's  Customs.  Niagara,  2  ;
Scribe,  Wawanosh  chap.,  15.
Scott,  Alexander,  Crown  Land  Agent,  County  Clerk,  and  Auctioneer  of  Real
Estate.     P.  S.  W.,  Victoria,  56.
Turnbull,  John,  Builder.     S.  W.,  Victoria,  56.
SIMCOE,  County  of  Norfolk.
Carnochan,  Peter,  Merchant.     Secretary  and  Treasurer,  Simcoe,  63.
Graham,  David,  Merchant.     Inner  Guard,  Norfolk,  10.
Groff,  Henry,  County  Treasurer,  Assistant  in  Government  Bank,  and  Insur-
ance Agent.     W.  M.,  Norfolk,  10  ;  Grand  Treasurer  Grand  Lodge  Canada.
Logan,  John,  Grocer.    J.  D.,  Norfolk,  10.
Lyon,  R.  C,  Mercantile  Clerk.    J.  W.,  Simcoe,  63.
Matheson,  Charles,  Attorney  at  Law,  etc.  W.  M.,  Simcoe,  63 ;  Grand
Steward  Grand  Lodge.
Ozbourn,  William  B.,  Governor  of  Jail.     S.  W.,  Norfolk,  10.
Salmon,  James  M.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.     Wilson,  113.
Tisdale,  David,  Barrister  and  Solicitor.     S.  W.,  Wilson,  113.
Weatherby,  John,  Merchant  Tailor.    Tyler,  Norfolk,  10.
Williamson,  John,  Restaurant.     J.  W.,  Norfolk,  10.
Wilson,  Col.  William  Mercer,  Barrister  and  Crown  Attorney.  P.  M.,  Nor-
folk, 10 ;  Past  1st  Prin.  Z.  of  Hiram  chap.,  2 ;  E.  Commander  of  Godfrey  de
Bouillon  encpt. ;  Grand  Master  of  Grand  Lodge  of  Canada,  from  a.l.  5855  to
a.l.  5860,  inclusive,  this  being  the  date  of  the  organization  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Canada ;  1st  Grand  Prin.  Z.  of  Grand  chap.,  R.  A.  Masons  in  Canada ;
member  Grand  encpt.,  England  and  Wales.
Wilson,  John  McFarland,  Merchant.     P.  Secretary,  Norfolk,'  10.
SPARTA,  County  of  Elgin.
Eakin,  John,  Merchant.     St.  Thomas,  44.
ST.  CATHARINE'S,  County  of  Lincoln.
Cairns,  James,  Tannery  and  Leather  Store.     St.  George's,  15.
Camp,  Charles  P.,  Town  Cierk  and  Treasurer.     S.  W.,  St.  George's,  15 ;  St.
John's  chap.,  6.
Dale,  John,  Dealer  in  Boots  and  Shoes.    J.  D.,  Maple  Leaf,  103.

--- Sayfa 108 ---
96  world's  masonic  register.
Dolson,  Samuel  G.,  Master  Builder.     P.  M.,  St.  George's,  15.
Giles,  H.  M.,  Chemist  and  Druggist.    Maple  Leaf,  103.
Goodman,  Edwin,  Physician  and  Surgeon.  S.  W.,  Maple  Leaf,  103  j  St.
John's  chap.,  6.
Henderson,  Andrew,  Grocer  and  Wine  Merchant.  Treasurer  and  P.  J.  and
S.  W.,  St.  George's,  15.
Macdonald,  Rolland,  Barrister  at  Law.     Maple  Leaf,  103.
Mack,  Theophilus,  Physician  and  Surgeon.  W.  M.,  St.  George's,  15 ;  Buf-
falo chap.,  71,  N.  Y. ;  Lake  Brie  com.,  20,  N.  Y.
McGhie,  William,  Broker,  Ins.  and  Land  Agent.     P.  M.,  Maple  Leaf,  103.
Mills,  James,  Druggist.     St.  George's,  15.
Norton,  Charles  P.,  Proprietor  of  Welland  House.     St.  John's,  40.
Seymore,  James,  Proprietor  Constitutional.  W.  M.,  Maple  Leaf,  103 ;  St.
John's  chap.,  6.
ST.  MAET'S,  County  of  Perth.
Belch,  Alexander  J.,  Proprietor  of  Argus.     J.  D.,  St.  James,  73.
Ellwood,  John,  Pounder  and  Dealer  in  Hardware.     St.  James,  73.
Ford,  A.  E.,  M.D.,  Graduate  of  Victoria  College.     St.  James,  73.
German,  R.  D.,  Merchant.     Secretary,  St.  James,  73.
Hatton,  W.  J.,  Flour  Manufacturer.     S.  D.,  St.  James,  73.
Huckett,  J.  O.,  Bridge  Inspector  of  G.  T.  R.  W.     St.  James,  73.
Lee,  R.,  Railroad  Conductor.     King  Solomon's,  22.
Long,  Edward,  Merchant  and  Manufacturer  of  Pots,  Pearls  and  Salaratus.
St.  James,  73.
McFadden,  James,  Attorney,  Solicitor,  Notary  Public,  Commissioner,  etc.
J.  W.,  St.  James,  73 ;  St.  John's  chap.
Mclntyre,  L.  A.,  Books,  Stationer,  and  Insurance  Agent.  W.  M.,  St.  James,
73.
Wickham,  Charles,  Founder  and  Hardware  Dealer.     St.  James,  73.
Winfleld,  William  W.,  Locomotive  Fireman  of  G.  T.  R.  W.  King  Solo-
mon's, 22 ;  King  Solomon's  chap.,  8.
STKATH  EOT,  County  of  "West  Middlesex.
Armstrong,  Wm.  H,  Merchant.     Secretary,  Beaver,  83.
Bettridge,  Wm.,  M.D.     S.  W.,  Beaver,  83.
Black,  John,  Cabinet  Manufacturer  and  Lumber  Merchant.    Inner  Guard,
Beaver,  83.
Blain,  Joseph  H.,  Druggist.    W.  M.,  Beaver,  83.
Bullock,  Francis,  Proprietor  Dell's  Hotel.
Frank,  John,  Gentleman  Farmer.     J.  W.,  Beaver,  83.
Fraser,  Hugh,  Dry  Goods,  Groceries,  and  Ashery.     J.  D.,  Beaver,  83.
Hickson,  Richard,  Merchant.     Beaver,  83.
Jeffery,  David,  Forwarding  and  Commission  Merchant.     St.  Thomas,  44.
Koyl,  Geo.  B.,  Merchant.     Secretary,  Beaver,  83.
Manning,  John,  Wagon,  Carriage,  and  Edge  Tool  Manufacturer.   Beaver,  83.
Rapley,  Wm.,  Merchant.     Treasurer  and  P.  J.  W.,  Beaver,  83.
Richardson,  Thomas,  Mercantile  Clerk.     Steward,  Beaver,  83.

--- Sayfa 109 ---
CANADA.  9T
Robertson,  Donald,  Proprietor  Dell's  Hotel.    Beaver,  83.
Smith,  E.  H.,  Grocer,  Wine  and  Spirit  Merchant.    Director  of  Ceremonies,
Beaver,  83.
Wilcox,  Abel,  Bailiff,  Constable,  Blacksmith,  Stock  Dealer,  etc.    Beaver,  83.
Wilson,  W.  P.,  Merchant  and  Parmer.     St.  John's,  20.
STRATFORD,  County  of  Perth.
Carrall,  J.  A.,  Barrister  at  Law.    St.  James,  73.
Corey,  T.  P.,  Proprietor  of  Albion  Hotel.     St.  Andrew's,  63.
Ebbs,  Worsley,  Teller  in  Bank  of  Upper  Canada.  P.  Secretary,  Wellington,
33  ;  now  member  of  St.  James,  73.
Henry,  P.  B.,  M.D.     St.  George's,  15.
Lee,  R.  H.,  Merchant.     Initiated  a.l.  5818  ;  P.  M.,  Wellington,  33.
Nopper,  John,  Founder  and  Machinist.     Sweet  Home,  132.
Robarts,  S.  L.,  Proprietor  of  Stratford  Examiner.  P.  Secretary,  Welling-
ton, 33.
Ryerson,  Edgerton,  Barrister  and  Attorney.     P.  M.,  Wellington,  33.
Sewell,  Henry,  Architect  and  Builder.     Amity,  32.
Shaver,  Peter  Ralf,  M.D.     P.  S.  D,  Wellington,  33.
Watson,  Peter,  Dry  Goods,  Groceries  and  Produce  Dealer.  Strict  Observ-
ance, 27.  /
ST.  THOMAS,  County  of  Elgin.
Caldwell,  Henry,  Merchant.     W.  M.,  St.  Thomas,  44;  R.  A.  Mason.
Laing,  Joseph,  Proprietor  of  Laing's  Hotel.     St.  Thomas,  44.
McKenzie,  M.,  Collector  of  Customs  and  Express  Agent.     St.  Thomas,  44.
Morgan,  George  W.,  Boot,  Shoe  and  Leather  Dealer.  Treasurer,  St.  Thomas,
44;  R.  A.  Mason.
Roe,  Charles,  Merchant  and  Dealer  in  Grain  for  Exportation.  P.  M.,  St.
Thomas,  44.
Thompson,  David,  Proprietor  of  Thompson's  Hotel.  Initiated  in  Richmond,
N.  Y.,  a.l.  5825,  P.  S.  W.,  Port  Stanley,  94  ;  now  member  of  St.  Thomas,  44.
Warren,  Thomas  D.,  Attorney,  Notary  Public,  Conveyancer,  etc.  P.  M.,  St.
Thomas,  44,  and  St.  Mark's,  94 ;  St.  John's,  chap.,  3 ;  Coaur  de  Lion  encpt. ;
Junior  G.  W.,  Grand  Lodge.
"W  hippie,  M.  P.,  Surgeon  and  Dentist.     S.  D.,  St.  Thomas,  44.
White,  William  J.,  Student  at  Law.  P.  M.,  St.  Thomas,  44 ;  St.  John's
chap.,  3.
SYLVAN,  County  of  "West   Middlesex.
Burns,  Robert,  Lumber  Merchant,  Postmaster,  and  Dry  Goods  Dealer.   Sect'y,
Cassia,  116.
Dawson,  Alex.,  Lumber  Sawyer.     Cassia,  116.
TORONTO,  County  of  York.
Arthurs,  Wm.,  Firm  of  Thomas  &  Arthurs,  Importing  Merchants,  20  King
Street  East.     King  Solomon's,  22  ;  Treasurer,  King  Solomon's  chap.,  8.
Bain,  James,  Bookseller  and  Stationer,  46  King  Street  West.  Secretary,  St.
Andrew's,  16  ;  St.  Andrew's  chap.,  4.

--- Sayfa 110 ---
98  world's  masonic  register.
Brumell,  Henry  P.,  Druggist,  13  King  Street  East.  St.  Andrew's,  16 ;  St.
Andrew's  chap.,  4.
Butters,  E.  L.,  Livery  Stable  and  Hotel-keeper,  40  King  Street  West.
P.  S.  D.,  King  Solomon's,  22  ;  St.  John's  chap.
Callisher,  D.  D.,  Importer  Watches,  Jewelry,  etc.,  6  King  Street  West.  J.
D.,  Wilson,  86 ;  King  Solomon's  chap.,  8.
Campbell,  S.  B.,  Barrister  at  Law.  P.  M.,  King  Solomon's,  22  ;  P.  M.,  Wil-
son, 86;  1st  Prin.  Z.,  King  Solomon's,  8;  P.  G.  S.  D.  Grand  Lodge;  Past
Grand  Prin.  Sojourner,  Grand  chap.
Carlisle,  Joseph,  Terrapin  Restaurant,  89  King  Street  East.     Rehoboam,  65.
Davis,  John  Edward,  Passenger  Agent  of  G.  T.  R.  W.  St.  John's,  75 ;  St.
John's  chap.,  3,  Scotch  Register.
Hall,  E.  R.,  Bookseller  and  General  News  Agent,  King  Street  West.  Senior
M.  of  Ceremonies,  Valley,  100,  Rochester,  N.  Y. ;  P.  P.  S.  aDd  Secretary,
Hamilton,  62,  Rochester,  N.  Y. ;  Monroe  chap.,  12.
Harman,  Samuel  B.,  Barrister  at  Law.  P.  M.,  St.  Andrew's,  16 ;  Deputy
G.  M.,  Grand  Lodge  Canada,  in  Toronto  Dist. ;  P.  G.  Registrar;  Grand  2d
Prin.  H.,  Grand  chap. ;  P.  G.  Scribe  N.  and  1st  Prin.  Z.  of  St.  Andrew's  chap.,
4 ;  Grand  Prior  Grand  encpt.  England  and  Wales ;  P.  Deputy  G.  Commander,
Goeffrey  de  St.  Aldemar  encpt.
Horton,  C.  G.,  American  Express  Office.     Barton,  6.
Hutchinson,  Thomas,  Broker  and  Insurance  Agent.  Wilson,  86 ;  King  Solo-
mon's chap.,  8.
Ionic  Lodge,  No.  798,  E.  R;  No.  18,  Provincial  Register ;  No.  25,  G.  R.  C;
meets  at  Masonic  Temple,  1st  Tuesday  each  month.
Jackes,  Joseph,  Law  Student.  W.  M.,  St.  John's,  75  ;  P.  3d  Prin.  J.  St.
John's  chap.,  75,  Scotch  Register ;  Registrar  of  Geoffrey  de  St.  Aldemar  encpt.
Jackson,  James,  Importer  of  China,  Glass,  and  Earthen  ware,  8  King  Street
West.  M.  of  Cer.,  St.  Andrew's,  16 ;  P.  S.,  St.  Andrew's  chap.,  4 ;  St.  Bearer
Geoffrey  de  St.  Aldemar  encpt.
Jacques,  Alex.,  Proprietor  Merchants'  Press.     Secretary,  Rehoboam,  65.
Levy,  L.  L.,  Firm  of  Levy  Brothers,  Importers  and  Dealers  in  Watches,
Jewelry,  and  Fancy  Goods,  84  King  Street.  W.  M.,  Wilson,  86 ;  King  Solo-
mon's chap.,  8.
Matheson,  Hugh,  Clothing  Merchant,  6  King  Street  East.  King  Solomon's,
22  ;  King  Solomon's  chap.,  8.
Murray,  Wm.     S.  W.,  King  Solomon's,  22.
'  Nickinson,  John,  Proprietor  Prince  of  Wales  Theatre,  King  Street  West.
St.  Andrew's,  16  ;  St.  Andrew's  chap.,  4 ;  Geoffrey  de  St.  Aldemar  encpt. ;  P.
Grand  Sword  B.,  Grand  encpt.
Patterson,  John,  Hardware  Merchant.  J.  W.,  St.  Andrew's,.16  ;  Scribe  N.,
St.  Andrew's,  4.
Riley,  J.  B.,  Proprietor  Revere  House,  Front  St.,  near  Union  Depot.  S.  D.,
Wilson,  86 ;  Steward,  King  Solomon's  chap.,  8.
Rowsell,  Henry  S.,  Books  and  Stationery,  76  King  Street  East.  St.  Andrew's,
16  ;  St.  Andrew's  chap.,  4.
Sargant,  Thomas,  The  Pantechnetheca,  45  King  Street  East.  Inner  Guard,
Wilson,  86  ;  King  Solomon's  chap.,  8.

--- Sayfa 111 ---
CANADA.  99 .
Simmer,  I.  A.,  Seedsman,  cor.  of  Front  Street  and  West  Market  Square.
King  Solomon's,  22.
Smith,  A.  0.,  Locomotive  Engineer.    King  Solomon's,  22.
Smith,  S.  Jones,  Brass  Founder,  46  Bathurst  Street.     St.  John's,  75.
Sowdon,  Arthur  Robt,  Civil  Engineer.  Strict  Observance,  3,  Detroit,  Michi-
gan; Peninsular  chap.,  16,  Michigan  ;  St.  Clair  com.,  7,  Michigan.
Spooner,  J.,  Importer  and  Dealer  in  Havana  and  Principe  Cigars,  Tobacco,
etc.,  41  King  Street  East.  M.  of  Cer.,  King  Solomon's,  22 ;  King  Solomon's
chap.,  8.
Spry,  Daniel  Clerk  in  Post  Office.  S.  W.,  King  Solomon's,  22  ;  Scribe  E.,
King  Solomon's  chap.,  8  ;  G.  S.,  Grand  chap.
Storm,  We.  George,  Architect  and  Civil  Engineer.  P.  M.,  St.  Andrew's,
16  ;  P.  Scribe  E.  and  Scribe  N.,  St.  Andrew's  chap.,  4;  P.  E.  C,  Geoffrey  de
St.  Aldemar  encpt. ;  Grand  Supt.  Works,  Grand  Lodge ;  P.  G.  Prin.  So-
journer, Grand  chap.
Taylor,  F.  P.  G.,  Commission  and  Forwarding  Merchant  for  Lumber,  etc.
Fidelity,  51,  Ithaca,  N.  Y.;  Eagle  chap.,  58,  Ithaca,  N.  Y.  '
Thurston,  D.,  Lumber  Merchant,  35  King  Street  West.   W.  M.,  Rehoboam,  05.
Worthington,  John,  Builder,  corner  of  Temperance  and  Bay  Streets.  King
Solomon's,  22  ;  St.  John's  chap.,  Scotch  Register.
TRENTON,  County  of  Hastings.
Alley,  William  H.,  Watchmaker  and  Jeweler.     D.  of  C,  Trent,  38.
Cruikshank,  Lewis,  Proprietor  of  R.  R.  House.     J.  D.,  Trent,  38.
Curzon,  J.  M.,  Distiller.    Trent,  38.
Day,  H.  W.,  M.D.,  Physician,  Surgeon  and  Coroner.     Trent,  38.
Delany,  H.  W.,  Attorney  at  Law,  Notary  Public,  etc.     S.  W.,  Trent,  38.
Galna,  Wm.,  Accountant.     Secretary,  Trent,  38.
German,  Jacob  Smith,  Proprietor  of  German  Hotel.     D.  of  G,  Trent,  38.
Gordon,  Robt.,  Merchant.     W.  M.,  Trent,  38  ;  Moira  chap.,  7.
Marsh,  James,  Bailiff  of  Division  Court.     Treasurer,  Trent,  38.
Nelson,  John,  Mercantile  Salesman.     J.  W.,  Trent,  38.
Roblin,  David,  Merchant.     Trent,  38.
Ryan,  R.  H.,  Agent  of  G.  T.  R.  W.    Trent,  38.
Shea,  William,  Merchant  and  Dealer  in  Tin  and  Copper  Ware,  Trent,  38.
Thompson,  G.  A.,  Deputy  Postmaster  and  Telegraph  Operator.     Trent,  38.
Thompson,  J.  W.,  Merchant.    Trent,  38.
TJM'IOM',  P.  O.,  County  of  Elgin.
Fordice,  Asa,  Agriculturalist.     Port  Stanley,  94.
Manderville,  William  H.,  Blacksmith.     Port  Stanley,  94.
"WIWDSOB,  County  of  Essex.
Boddy,  Thomas,  Clerk  of  G.  W.  R.  W.  Secretary,  Great  Western,  47  ;  2d
Prin.  H.,  Wilson  chap.,  11.
Burt,  John,  Locomotive  Engineer.     St.  George's,  37 ;  Wilson  chap.,  11.
Dewson,  Alfred  K.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.     W.  M.,  Great  Western,  47..
Francombe,  George,  Engineer  of  Steamer  Transit.  Great  Western,  47;  Wil-
son chap.,  11.

--- Sayfa 112 ---
100  worid's  masonic  register.
Great  "Western  Lodge,  47.  Chartered  a.l.  5854.  Regular  meetings,  Thurs-
days on  or  before  full  moon.
Hutton,  John,  Proprietor  of  Windsor  Castle  Hotel.  P.  S.  D.,  Great  "Western,
47;  Scribe  N.,  Wilson  chap.,  11.
Kilborn,  George,  Teller  in  Bank  of  Upper  Canada.  P.  M.,  Victoria,  56 ;
Wawanosh  chap.,  15.
Murray,  Daniel,  Clerk  of  Commercial  Bank,  Upper  Canada.  P.  J.  W.,  King
Solomon's,  22  ;  King  Solomon's  chap.,  8.
Perkins,  Thomas,  Collector  of  Her  Majesty's  Customs.  P.  M.,  Great  West-
ern, 47 ;  P.  P.  S.,  Ancient  Frontenac  chap.,  1 ;  Hugh  de  Payen's  encpt. ;  Past
Sen.  G.  D.  of  G.  L.,  Canada.
Popplewell,  Thomas,  Machinist.     Senior  D.,  Great  Western,  47.
Shipley,  George,  Merchant  Tailor.     S.  W.,  Great  Western,  47.
Watson,  Edwin,  Commander  of  G.  W.  R.  W.  Steamer  Union.  Great  West-
ern, 47  ;  3d  Prin.  J.,  Wilson  chap.,  11 ;  K.  C,  Detroit  com.,  1.
WOODSTOCK,  County  of  Oxford.
Andrews,  John,  Produce  and  Commission  Merchant.     S.  D.,  Oxford,  76.
Bryant,  John  H.,  School  Teacher.    King  Solomon's.  43.
Burgess,  Samuel,  Auctioneer  and  Detective.    King  Solomon's,  43.
Carroll,  Capt.  John  Graham,  Solicitor,  Attorney,  Notary  Public,  etc.,  Chap-
lain, Oxford,  76.
Carroll,  D.,  Proprietor  Alhambra  Hotel.    King  Solomon's,  43.
Carroll,  R.  W.,  M.D.     Elgin,  348,  S.  R.,  Montreal ;  M.  E.  M.
Charles,  Jordon,  Collector  of  Her  Majesty's  Customs.  W.  M.,  Oxford,  76;
Mark  Master  Mason.
Dorgan,  William,  Law  Student.     Secretary,  Oxford,  76.
Forbes,  George,  Governor  Woodstock  Jail.    W.  M.,  King  Solomon's,  43.
Grey,  William,  Justice  of  the  Peace  and  Issuer  of  Marriage  Licenses,  Notary
Public,  etc.     Oxford,  76.
Hack,  Henry,  Agriculturalist  and  Proprietor  Clarendon  Hotel.  King  Solo-
mon's, 43  ;  Hiram  chap.,  2.
Hay,  John,  Boot  and  Shoe  Dealer.     Inner  Guard,  King  Solomon's,  43.
lies,  Charles,  Clerk  in  Registry  Office.     J.  W.,  Oxford,  76.
McCleneghan,  Alexander  R.,  Editor  and  Proprietor  Times.  P.  J.  and  S.  W.,
King  Solomon's,  43  ;  Mark  Master  Mason.
McWhinnie,  John,  Editor  Sentinel.  P.  M.,  King  Solomon's,  43 ;  Most  Excel-
lent Master.
Van  Voorhiez,  J.  B.,  Proprietor  Woodstock  Hotel.    Oxford,  76.
Whitehead,  Col.  George  W.,  Justice  of  the  Peace,  Notary  Public,  Commis-
sioner in  Queen's  Bench.  P.  M.,  Oxford,  76  ;  King  Solomon's,  76 ;  1st  Prin.  Z.,
Oxford  chap.,  18  ;  C.  G.,  St.  Aldemar  encpt. ;  District  Deputy  Grand  Master,
Wilson  District;  P.  G.  S.  W.
WHITBY",  County  of  Ontario.
Billings,  William  H.,  Barrister  at  Law.     S.  W.,  Composite,  30  ;  St.  John's
chap.,  75,  Scotch  Register.
Doel,  William  H.,  Druggist  and  Apothecary.     Composite,  30.

--- Sayfa 113 ---
CANADA.  101
Dornan,  John  0.,  Printer.    P.  M.,  Composite,  30.
Gibson,  Yeoman,  firm  Gibson  &  Yamold,  Merchants.  Present  and  Past
Master,  Composite,  30  ;  St.  John's,  75,  Scotch  R.
Lowes,  John  M.,  &  Powell,  James  B.,  Importers  and  Dealers  in  Eeady-made
Clothing,  Dry  Goods,  Groceries,  etc.    Composite,  30.
McCabe,  We,  Principal  Grammar  School.  P.  S.  W.,  Composite,  30  ;  St.
John's  chap.,  75,  S.  R. ;  Geoffrey  de  St.  Aldemar  encpt.,  37.
Tremayne,  William  Henry,  Barrister  at  Law  and  County  Attorney.  J.  W.,
Composite,  30  ;  St.  John's  chap.,  75,  Scotch  Register.
Wallace,  James,  Gentleman.  P.  M.,  Composite,  30 ;  St.  John's,  75,  Scotch
Register.
THE  RECOVERED  SNUFF-BOX.
The  following  anecdote  is  to  be  found  in  the  London  Freemasons'  Quarterly
Review.  It  is  related  on  the  authority,  and  almost  in  the  words  of  Brother
Blaquierre,  Provincial  Deputy  Grand  Master  for  Bengal,  a  man  who,  at  the
patriarchal  age  of  ninety-three,  gave  the  testimony  of  his  long  experience  to  the
excellency  of  Freemasonry.
"A  medical  gentleman  had  realized  a  moderate  fortune  in  the  Brazils,  and
intending  to  return  to  England,  he  invested  the  fruits  of  his  industry  in  precious
stones,  which  were  secured  in  a  small  box.  This  treasure  he  shipped  on  board
a  vessel,  secured  his  own  passage  in  another,  and  safely  reached  England.  But
alas  for  him !  scarcely  had  he  arrived,  when  he  received  the  fatal  intelligence
that  the  vessel,  on  board  of  which  he  had  freighted  his  entire  fortune,  had  been
wrecked  on  the  coast  of  Cornwall.  Thus,  in  his  declining  years,  the  means  of
subsistence  had  vanished  from  him  ;  he  had  returned  to  his  native  land  poorer
than  he  had  left  it.  About  a  twelvemonth  had  passed,  when,  one  day,  a  stranger
called  at  his  humble  lodgings  and  inquired  for  him  ;  he  was  admitted.  The
stranger,  who  was  closely  muffled  up,  and  appeared  desirous  of  concealment,
asked  a  few  questions  relating  to  the  Brazils,  and  others  as  to  the  circumstances
of  our  hero,  who  felt  somewhat  disconcerted.  At  length  the  stranger  drew
from  under  his  cloak  the  identical  box  containing  the  lost  treasure ;  his  surprise
and  emotion  satisfied  the  stranger,  who,  simply  asking  him  if  it  was  his,  imme-
diately delivered  it  to  him,  and  made  a  sign.  All  that  transpired  was,  that  the
box  came  into  the  possession  of  the  stranger,  who,  on  opening  it,  found  at  the
top  a  snuff-box  with  Masonic  emblems,  and  a  name  that  enabled  him,  after
much  difficulty,  to  discover  the  real  owner.  The  stranger  took  a  hasty  leave,
and  was  no  more  heard  of.  Conjecture  pointed  at  the  possibility  of  his  being
what  is  termed  'a  wrecker;'  but  the  ways  of  Providence  are  inscrutable  in
teaching  the  powerful  lessons  of  retribution.  Masonry,  as  a  moral  engine,  has
elicited  many  mysterious  instances  of  the  power  of  the  human  heart,  however
depraved,  to  correct  itself.  But  to  the  sequel.  The  snuff-box  became  dear  to
the  party  thus  restored  to  prosperity;  and  in  time  it  was  bequeathed  to  a  gentle-
man, who,  thinking  that  it  should  remain  in  the  hands  of  a  zealous  Mason,  pre-
sented it  to  Brother  Blaquierre,  whose  successors  will,  no  doubt,  prize  it  as  a
sign  and  token  of  Masonic  interest."

--- Sayfa 114 ---
CONNECTICUT.
GRAND  LODGE.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  Connecticut  was  organized  July  8th,  5789.    Its  Com-
munications are  annual,  and  held  alternately  at  New  Haven  and  Hartford,  on
the  second  Wednesday  in  May.    Its  membership  consists  of  the  Grand  Officers,
Past  Grand  Officers,  and  the  Masters  and  Wardens  of  the  subordinate  Lodges.
The  revenue  of  the  Grand  Lodge  is  derived  from  the  following  sources : —
For  a  Dispensation  or  a  Charter  for  a  new  Lodge   .        .    $15  00
For  every  Initiation
1  00
For  Dispensation  for  defunct  Lodges  to  resume  labor      .      10  00
For  Grand  Lodge  certificates  .        .  0  50
There  are  64  subordinate  Lodges  in  this  jurisdiction.  The  number  of  affiliated
Masons,  as  per  returns  in  May,  5860,  was  5854.  The  number  initiated  during
the  year  was  642 ;  Deaths,  60 ;  Suspensions,  2  ;  Expulsions,  4.  The  amount
received  for  Grand  Lodge  dues  was  $642.
The  present  officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Connecticut  are  : —
Howard  B.  Ensign,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
Frederick  P.  Coe,  R.  W.  Deputy  Grand  Master.
David  E.  Bostwick,  Senior  Grand  Warden.
Nelson  N.  Barrett,  Junior  Grand  Warden.
Benjamin  Beecher,  Grand  Treasurer.
Eliphalet  G.  Storer,  Grand  Secretary.
Arthur  B.  Calef,  Senior  Grand  Deacon.
Alt  an  P.  Hide,  Junior  Grand  Deacon.
Samuel  B.  Gorham,  Grand  Marshal.
Amos  S.  Treat,  Grand  Sentinel.
Charles  Webster,      ]  .-,       ■,  0.  ,
_   „     _  r    ,  '      >  Grand  Stewards.
P.  St.  M.  Andrews,    i
Henry  E.  Patten,  Grand  Tyler.
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.
No.  Lodge.  Location.  Time  op  Meeting.  Mister.
1  Hiram,  New  Haven.  1st  &  3d  Thursdays.  Samuel  B.  Gorham.
2  St.  John's,  Middletown.  1st  &  3d  Fridays.  James  E.  Bidwell.
3  St.  John's,  Bridgeport.  Every  Wednesday.  Amos  S.  Treat.
4  St.  John's,  Hartford.  Every  Wednesday.  Levi  Woodhouse.
5  Union,  Stamford.  1st  &  3d  Weds.  Philip  L.  Hoyt.
6  St.  John's,  Norwalk.  1st  &  3d  Thurdays.  Albert  H.  Wilcoxson.
7  King  Solomon's,   Woodbury.  Every  Wednesday.  Jas.  Huntington.
8  St.  John's,  Stratford.  Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.  Alfred  B.  Judd.
(102)

--- Sayfa 115 ---
CONNECTICUT.
103
No.
IiODOE.
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
9  Compass,
10  Wooster,
1  1  St.  Paul's,   .
12  King  Hiram,
13  Montgomery,
14  Frederick,
15  Moriah,
17  Federal,
20  Harmony,
24  Uriel,
26  Columbia,
28  Morning  Star,
29  Village,
31  Union,
33  Friendship,
34  Somerset,
36  St.  Mark's,
38  St.  Alban's,
40  Union,
42  Harmony,
43  Trinity,
44  Eastern  Star,
46  Putnam,
47  Morning  Star,
48  St.  Luke's,
49  Jerusalem,
50  Warren,
51  Warren,
52  Mount  Olive,
55  Seneca,
56  Franklin,
57  Asylum,
58  Northern  Star,
59  Apollo,
60  Wolcott,
62  Orient,
63  Adelphi,
64  St.  Andrew's,
66  Widow's  Son,
67  Harmony,
68  Charity,
69  Fayette,
73  Manchester,
77  Meriden,
78  Shepherd,
79  Wooster,
80  Berlin,
81  Washington,
82  Geo.  Washington,
Wallingford.
Colchester.
Litchfield.
Derby.
Salisbury.
Plainville.
West  Killingly.
Watertown.
New  Britain.
Mansfield.
East  Haddam.
Warehouse  Point.
Collinsville.
New  London.
Southington.
Norwich.
Tariffville.
Guilford.
Danbury.
Waterbury.
Deep  River.
Willimantic.
Woodstock.
Seymour.
Kent.
Ridgefield.
South  Coventry.
Portland.
Essex.
Wolcottville.
Bristol.
Stonington.
New  Hartford.
Suffield.
Stafford.
East  Hartford.
Fair  Haven.
West  Winsted.
Branford.
New  Canaan.
Mystic  Bridge.
Rockville.
Manchester.
Meriden.
Naugatuck.
New  Haven.
Berlin.
Cromwell.
Ansonia.
1st  Thursday.
Every  Friday.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Every  Wednesday.
Every  Monday.
Last  W.  in  the  month
Every  Wednesday.
Every  Monday.
Tuesday  of  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
Every  Wednesday.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Every  Thursday.
2d  &  4th  Monday.
1st  Wednesday.
1st  Wednesday.
1st  Wed.  b.  f.  m.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tuesday  of  f.  m.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
Every  Friday.
Every  Tuesday.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Tu.  in  the  month.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tu.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tu.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Weds.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
Monday  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Every  Wednesday.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
Henry  Martin.
Albert  Keeney.
David  E.  Bostwick.
Geo.  A.  Peck.
John  A.  Belcher.
Alonzo  N.  Lewis.
Ed.  L.  Cundall.
Elijah  M.  Smith.
Wash'ton  L.  Morgan.
Alvan  P.  Hyde.
Roswell  D.  Spencer.
Solomon  Terry.
Wm.  H.  Parmelee.
Frederick  L.  Allen.
Solomon  Finch.
P.  St.  M.  Andrews.
Ed.  Holcomb.
Ashael  B.  Morse.
Jas.  H.  Jenkins.
Nathan  Dikeman.
Wm.  C.  Rogers.
Calvin  H.  Davison.
Wm.  H.  Copp.
Israel  French.
Eber  S.  Peters.
Hiram  K.  Scott.
D.  W.  Huntington.
Stephen  H.  Slocking.
Jared  E.  Redfield.
Edward  Pierpont.
Joel  H.  Root.
Francis  Amy.
Ed.  Smith.
John  Burns,  Jr.
Moses  B.  Harvey.
Samuel  Tripp.
Chas.  S.  Thompson.
Stephen  A.  Hubbard.
Wm.  Nash.
Caleb  S.  Benedict.
Chas.  S.  Landers.
Henry  W.  Coye.
Henry  Gardner.
Newton  F.  Hart.
David  Smith.
Nehemiah  D.  Sperry.
Wm.  M.  Fowler.
Marvin  R.  Warner.
John  Cowel.

--- Sayfa 116 ---
104
WORLD'S   MASONIC   REGISTER.
No.       Lodge.
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
Master.
83  Eureka,
84  Olive  Branch,
85  Acacia,
86  Daskam,
87  Madison,
88  Hartford,
89  Ansantawae,
Bethel.
Westville.
Greenwich.
Glastenbury.
Madison.
Hartford.
Milford.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
2d  &  4th  Thursdays.
Tu.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
Jas.  Fenning.
M.  B.  Scott.
Jos.  Home.
Albert  A.  Bogue.
Horace  Butler.
And'w  G.  Hammond.
Thos.  A.  Dutton.
GRAND  CHAPTER.
The  Grand  Chapter  of  Connecticut  was  organized  on  the  17th  of  May,  5798.
Its  Annual  Convocations  are  held  at  Hartford  and  New  Haven  alternately,
commencing  on  Tuesday  preceding  the  second  Wednesday  in  May.  This  Grand
Chapter  is  subordinate  to  the  General  Grand  Chapter.  It  has  21  subordinate
Chapters  under  its  jurisdiction,  19  of  which  made  returns  at  its  Annual  Convo-
cation, in  May,  5860,  as  follows :  Number  of  Members,  1531 ;  Exaltations,  172 ;
Deaths,  16.  Dues  paid  to  Grand  Chapter,  $309.  Its  next  Annual  Convocation
will  be  held  at  Hartford,  May  7th,  5861.
SUBORDINATE  CHAPTERS.
No.        Name.
2  Franklin,
3  Solomon,
4  Franklin,
6  Washington,
7  Union,
9  Trinity,
11  Rittenhouse,
12  Warren,
13  Jerusalem,
15  Meridian,
16  Darius,
17  Pythagoras,
19  Jerusalem,
20  Lafayette,
21  Benevolence,
22  Eureka,
23  Eureka,
24  Washington,
25  Giddings,
26  Pulaski,
27  Keystone,
Location.
New  Haven.
Ansonia.
Norwich.
Middletown.
New  London.
Willimantic.
Stamford.
Killingly.
Bridgeport.
West  Winsted.
Litchfield.
Hartford.
Ridgefield.
Granby.
Stonington.
Waterbury.
Danbury.
Norwalk.
New  Britain.
Fair  Haven.
Meriden.
Time  of  Meeting.
1st  Tuesday.
2d  Friday.
Tuesday  on  or  bef.  full  moon.
1st  Wednesday.
2d  Monday.
Last  Thursday.
1st  Tuesday.
3d  Tuesday.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Last  Wednesday.
Every  Friday.
Every  Thursday.
Friday  on  or  bef.  full  moon.
1st  Monday.
2d  &  4th  Wednesdays.
2d  Wednesday.
Tuesday  before  full  moon.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
2d  Tuesday.
Tuesday  on  or  bef.  f.  moon.
E.  G.  Siober,  Grand  Secretary,  New  Haven.

--- Sayfa 117 ---
CONNECTICUT.
105
GRAND  COUNCIL  OF  ROYAL  AND  SELECT  MASTERS.
The  Grand  Council  of  Connecticut  was  organized  5819.  It  holds  its  Annual
Assembly  alternately  at  Hartford  and  New  Haven,  in  the  month  of  May.  It
has  17  subordinate  Councils  under  its  jurisdiction,  whose  last  returns  give  912
Members,  115  Candidates  received,  and  12  Deaths.  Dues  paid  to  Grand  Coun-
cil, $105.
SUBORDINATE  COUNCILS.
No.       Name.
1  Woloott,
2  Montgomery,
Eranklin,
4  Cushing,
8  Harmony,
9  Columbia,
16  Jerusalem,
17  Washington,
18  Jerusalem,
19  Crawford,
20  Buel,
21  Waterbury,
22  Hamilton,
26  Adoniram,
27  Union,
28  Doric,
29  Webb*
Location.
Hartford.
Killingly.
Norwich.
New  London.
New  Haven.
Middletown.
Bridgeport.
Norwalk.
Kidgefield.
Fair  Haven.
Litchfield.
Waterbury.
West  Meriden.
Manchester,  N.  H.
Derby.
New  Britain.
Warren,  R.  I.
Time  op  Meeting.
1st  Tu.  Feb.  May,  Aug.  Nov.
3d  Monday.
1st  Tuesday.
2d  Monday.
Wednesday  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
4th  Tu.  Mar.  June,  Sep.  Dec.
3d  Wednesday.
Thursday  on  or  bef.  f.  moon,
Thursday  after  full  moon.
4  th  Friday.
2d  Thursday.
3d  Saturday.
GRAND  ENCAMPMENT.
Organized  September  13th,  1827.
This  Grand  Encampment  holds  its  Annual  Conclave  on  the  second  Thursday
of  May.  It  has  6  subordinate  Encampments  under  its  jurisdiction,  with  440
members.
SUBORDINATE  ENCAMPMENTS.
No.       Name.
1  Washington,
2  New  Haven,
3  Clinton,
4  Columbia,
5  Hamilton,
6  Palestine,
Location.
Hartford.
New  Haven.
Norwalk.
Norwich.
Bridgeport.
New  London.
Time  of  Meeting.
1st  Friday.
3d  Friday.
Friday  on  or  bef.  full  moon.
2d  Friday.
4th  Tuesday.
Last  Friday.
*  A  Grand  Council  was  formed  for  the  State  of  Khode  Island,  on  the  30th  of  October,  5860,  of  which
Webb  Council  was  one  of  the  Councils  constituting  it,  and  is,  consequently,  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the
Grand  Council  of  Rhode  Island.

--- Sayfa 118 ---
106  world's  masonic  register.
SUBSCRIBERS'  NAMES.
BEANPOED.
Basher,  John  R.,  Mechanic.    "Widow's  Son,  66.
Harrison,  David,  Proprieter  Branford  House.     "Widow's  Son,  66.
Nash,  "William,  Knob  Manufacturer.     "W.  M.,  "Widow's  Son,  66.
Page,  J.  Henry,  Merchant.     Widow's  Son,  66.
MIDDLETOWN.
Caleff,  A.  B.,  Lawyer,  Ex-State  Treasurer.     S.  G.  D. ;  St.  John's,  2.
DEEP  KIVEB.
Beeraan,  Edgar  0.,     Secretary  of  Trinity,  42 ;  "Washington  chap.,  6.
Denison,  Jno.  S.,  Steamboat  Agent,  Chester.     Trinity,  43.
Phelps,  Geo.  N.,  Ship-carpenter.    Trinity,  43.
Pratt,  N.  B.,  Manufacturer  of  Hardware.     Trinity,  43.
Bead,  Spencer,  Mechanic,  with  C.  B.  Bogers  &  Co.     S.  D.,  Trinity,  43.
Snow,  C.  W.,  Sheriff  for  Middlesex  county.     Trinity,  43.
"Williams,  P.  "W.,  Mechanic.     S.  \Y\,  Trinity,  43.
EAST  SADDAM.
Baker,  Edwin  R.,  Manufacturer.     Columbia,  26.
Bates,  Hanson  A.,  Captain  of  Steamboat  W.  Irving.     Columbia,  26.
Bulkley,  Daniel,  Merchant.     Wooster,  10.
Chapman,  N.  Olmsted,  Teacher  of  Music.    J.  W.,  Columbia,  26.
Cowdrey,  Loren,  Manufacturer  of  Cotton  Duck.     St.  John's,  2.
Gesner,  Johu  G.,  Engineer.     S.  D.,  Columbia,  26.
Hitchings,  H.  B.,  Clergyman  of  St.  Stephen's  Church.  Chaplain  of  Colum-
bia, 26.
Martin,  Jr.,  Samuel,  Merchant.     J.  D.,  Columbia,  26.
Richmond,  Geo.  S.,  Mechanic.     Columbia,  26.
Rodman,  "Wm.,  Manufacturer.     Columbia,  26.
Selden,  Joseph  E.,  Proprietor  of  Gelston  House.     P.  M.,.  Columbia,  26.
Spencer,  R.  Emmett,  Clerk.     Tyler  of  Columbia,  26.
Spencer,  R.  D.,  Mechanic.  "W.  M.,  Columbia,  26  ;  "Washington  chap.,  6;
Columbia  coun.,  9.
"Wattrous,  Jr.,  A.  D.,  Merchant.     Columbia,  26.
Wetherell,  D.,  Manufacturer.     Columbia,  26.
ESSEX.
Braddock,  "Wm.  T,  Sailmaker.     Mount  Olive,  52.
Doan,  W.  H.,  Sailor.    Mount  Olive,  52.
Hayden,  A.     Mount  Olive,  52.
Hayden,  John  G.,  Painter.     Secretary  of  Mount  Olive,  52.
Hayden,  T.  S.,  Merchant.    Trinity,  43.
Phelps,  James,  Attorney  at  Law.     Mount  Olive,  52.
Redfleld,  Edward  W.,  Merchant.     Mount  Olive,  52.
Redfleld,  Jared  E.,  Cashier  of  Saybrook  Bank.    "W.  M.,  Mount  Olive,  52.

--- Sayfa 119 ---
CONNECTICUT.  107
GUILFOBD.
Fisk,  H.  J.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.    St.  Alban's,  38.
Fowler,  Wm.  W.,  Farmer  and  Drover.     St.  Alban's,  38.
Hale,  E.  A.,  Merchant.     Trinity,  43.
Hale,  John,  Dealer  in  Dry  Goods,  Groceries,  etc.    Sec,  St  Alban's,  38.
Kimberly,  Geo.  E.,  Dealer  in  Groceries  and  Provisions.    St.  Alban's,  38.
Morse,  A.  B.     W.  M.,  St.  Alban's,  38.
Serrard,  Wm.  T.,  Merchant.     St.  Alban's,  38.
Tryon,  J.  T.,  Wood  Carver.    J.  D.,  St.  Alban's,  38.
MADISON.
Butler,  Horace,  Carpenter.    W.  M.,  Madison,  87.
Dudley,  J.  W.,  Attorney  and  Counselor  at  Law.     Madison,  87.
Scranton,  T.  L.,  Dentist.     Madison,  87.
Webb,  Daniel  M.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.    Treas.,  Madison,  87.
White,  Thomas.    Tyler,  Madison,  87.
Willard,  S.  F.,  Agent  for  N.  E.  for  Paragon  Soap  Co.,  N.  Y.     S.  W.,  Madi-
son, 87.
MEKIDEN.
Andrews,  Almon  C,  Miller.     Meriden,  77 ;  Keystone  chap.,  27.
Andrews,  Julius,  Proprietor  Hemlock  Grove.     Meriden,  77.
Augur,  Marshall  C,  Malleable  Iron  Manufacturer.     Meriden,  77.
Brainard,  Robert  L.     Columbia,  25  ;  Pythagoras  chap.,  17.
Byxbee,  Theodore,  Billiard  Saloon.     St.  John's,  6  ;  Keystone  chap.,  27.
Dickinson,  Gardner  K,  Mechanic.     Meriden,  77  ;  P.  C,  Hamilton  coun.,22.
Dickinson,  George  S.,  Mechanic.     S.  W.,  Meriden,  77    R.  A.  C,  Keystone
chap.,  27.
Ernest,  Chas.,  Burnisher.    Meriden,  77  ;  Keystone  chap.,  27.
Fay,  Geo.  A.,  Telegraph  Operator  and  Express  Agent.    Meriden,  77.
Gladwin,  Russel  S.,  Mechanic.     Meriden,  77 ;  Keystone  chap.,  27.
Hall,  F.  M.,  Butcher.     Meriden,  77.
Hart,  Newton  F.,  Merchant.     W.  M.,  Meriden,  77  ;  H.  P.,  Keystone  chap.,  27
Johnson,  S.  E.,  Cutlery.     Meriden,  77  ;  Keystone  chap.,  27.
Parker,  Emery,  Manufacturer.     Meriden,  77  ;  Scribe,  Keystone  chap.,  27.
Parker,  John,  Manufacturer.     P.  M.,  Meriden,  77;  Keystone  chap.,  26.
Rice,  Ashbel  B.,  Butcher  and  Farmer.     Meriden,  77.
Smith,  Lorenzo,  Butcher.     Meriden,  77  ;  Keystone  chap.,  27.
Waterman,  Reuben,  Livery.     Meriden,  77  ;  Keystone  chap.,  27.
Whittaker,  Wm.  M.,  Britannia  Worker.     Meriden,  77.
NEW  HAVEN
Adams,  Enos  0.,  Spoke-turner.     Hiram,  1.
Carrington,  Martin,  Wood-turner.     Morning  Star,  47.
Hallenbeck,  N.  S.,  Coach-maker.     Hiram,  1 ;  Franklin  chap.,  2  ;   Harmony
coun.,  8.
Kettle,  Francis,  Brass-turner.    Olive  Branch,  84.

--- Sayfa 120 ---
108  world's  masonic  register.
Osborn,  Edwin,  Brass-turner.     Hiram,  1.
Parker,  Erastus  N.,  Carriage-smith.     Mount  Olive,  52.
Perkins,  Wm.  W.,  Carriage-smith.    Hiram,  1.
Seabrook,  Henry  C,  Coach-maker.     Hiram,  1.     .
Sperry,  N.  D.    W.  M.,  Wooster,  79 ;  Franklin  chap.,  2  ;  Harmony  coun.,  8;
New  Haven  encamp.,  2.
Ware,  A.  C,  Assistant  Jailer.     Wooster,  79.
West,  Alfred,  Carriage-trimmer.     Hiram,  1.
MASONIC  FRIENDSHIP.
The  following  anecdote  was  contributed  to  the  Freemasons'  Quarterly  Review
by  the  individual  who  was  one  of  the  actors  in  this  scene  of  Masonic  friendship.
By-the-way,  it  may  be  remarked,  that  Don  Miguel  has  always  been  considered  as
the  beau  ideal  of  an  anti-mason,  and  was  not  less  distinguished  for  his  perse-
cution of  the  order  than  he  was  for  his  desecration  of  everything  else  that  was
pure,  or  true,  or  noble.
"  The  son  of  a  Portuguese  nobleman  and  myself  spent  some  few  years  of  oar
early  youth  together  ;  the  friendship  of  boyhood  was  interrupted  by  the  changes
consequent  on  our  relative  stations.  He  returned  to  his  family ;  I  embarked  in
commercial  pursuits.  In  1828,  my  engagements  directed  me  to  Lisbon,  where
our  former  friendship  was  renewed,  and,  if  possible,  with  increased  warmth  on
both  sides.  My  friend  was  aid-de-camp  to  Don  Miguel ;  and  as  a  mark  of
respect  to  my  feelings,  he  became  a  Freemason,  and  paid  very  considerable
attention  to  its  observances  and  dictates.  If  not  altogether  inseparable,  we
were  mutually  bound  by  a  tie  of  deep  interest ;  our  tastes  agreed  in  every  par-
ticular ;  he  delighted  in  my  prospect  of  commercial  success  ;  and  although,  as
an  Englishman,  I  did  not  approve  of  Don  Miguel,  the  position  of  my  friend  led
me  to  look  on  that  policy  with  less  severity  than  might  otherwise  have  been  the
case.
"My  friend  one  day  called  on  me,  evidently  in  a  disturbed  state  of  mind,  and
told  me  that  he  was  about  to  prove  to  me,  as  a  Mason,  how  powerfully  he  rever-
enced his  obligation.  '  The  king,'  said  he,  '  has  decreed  the  arrest  of  forty  gentle-
men now  on  board  the  "  Duke  of  York"  steamer :  they  are  liberals,  and  are  of  your
opinions.  When  taken,  there  will  be  no  chance  of  their  lives.  The  order  is
now  in  my  office,  awaiting  my  signature ;  I  will  take  care  not  to  return  until
you  shall  have  had  time  to  apprise  them  of  their  danger :  there  shall  be  three
hours  clear  for  such  purpose,  and  a  boat  with  four  men  is  ready.  One  hug — it
may  be  the  last  I'  We  did  not  speak— he  left  me.  I  hastened  to  fulfill  his
command,  reached  the  boat,  and  being  an  Englishman,  my  dashing  through  a
number  of  armed  boats  was  merely  ascribed  to  some  frolic.  I  gained  the
steamer,  and,  as  may  be  expected,  surprised  the  party  by  my  information.
They  immediately  left,  in  boats,  and  rowed  to  the  '  Pyramus,'  and  were  received
by  Captain  Sartorinus,  who  protected  them,  and  thus  their  lives  were  saved."

--- Sayfa 121 ---
DELAWARE.
GRAND  LODGE.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  Delaware  was  organized  June  6th,  5806.  Its  Annual
Communications  are  held  in  the  City  of  Wilmington,  on  the  fourth  Monday  in
June.  A  new  Constitution,  under  consideration  to  be  acted  on  at  the  Semi-
Annual  Communication,  December  27th,  5860,  changes  the  time  to  the  second
Monday  in  September.  The  Grand  Lodge  is  composed  of  the  Grand  Officers,
Past  Grand  and  Deputy  Grand  Masters,  Past  Grand  Wardens,  Past  Grand
Treasurers  and  Past  Grand  Secretaries,  and  Masters  and  Wardens  of  Lodges.
The  revenue  of  the  Grand  Lodge  is  derived  from  the  following  sources : —
For  Dispensations  for  new  Lodges         ....      $15  00
For  Warrants,  in  addition
15  00
Por  Dispensations  to  confer  the  three  degrees       .        .  5  00
For  Dispensations  for  same  for  seafaring  men  .  2  00
For  Dispensations  to  ballot  and  confer  first  degree        .  2  00
For  Dispensations  to  confer  F.  C.  or  M.  M.  degree    .  2  00
For  Past  Master's  degree
5  00
For  Grand  Lodge  diplomas
2  00
For  Dispensations  for  public  processions  other  than  for
burying  the  dead
5  00
For  Grand  Lodge  traveling  certificate       ....  50
For  every  Initiation  in  Wilmington       ....  5  00
For  every  Initiation  in  other  parts  of  the  State        .  3  00
For  every  E.  A.  or  F.  C.  from  without  the  jurisdiction  .  3  00
For  Adjoining  fees  of  Master  Masons       .        .        .  1  00
Dues  for  each  Member
   50
There  are  12  subordinate  Lodges  in  Delaware.    The  following  is  the  summary
of  returns  for  the  year   ending  June  27,  5860 :  Number  of  Master  Masons,
533  ;  Initiations,  40  ;  Passings,  38  ;  Eaisings,  34 ;  Affiliations,  5  ;  Eejections,
8  ;  Withdrawn,  4 ;  Suspended,  35 ;  Deaths,  4 ;  Amount  of  receipts,  $219.
The  officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  for  the  present  Masonic  year  are  :—
John  B.  McFee,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
George  W.  Chaytor,  E.  W.  Dep.  Grand  Master.
Jacob  Moore,  E.  W.  Senior  Grand  Warden.
Samuel  W.  Hollingsworth,  E.  W.  Junior  Grand  Warden.
William  S.  Hates,  E.  W.  Grand  Secretary.
Jacob  Eichardson,  E.  W.  Grand  Treasurer.
Eev.  Henry  C.  Fries,  W.  Grand  Chaplain.
(109)

--- Sayfa 122 ---
110
world's  masonic  register.
Henry  Stout,  Grand  Marshal.
Make  A.  Greer,  Senior  Grand  Deacon.
Peter  Taylor,  Junior  Grand  Deacon.
Benjamin  N.  Ogle,  Grand  Sword  Bearer.
John  H.  Bkitton,  Grand  Tyler.
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
Master.
1  Washington,
2  St.  John's,
4  Hope,
5  Union,
7  Union,
9  Temple,
11  Temple,
12  Franklin,
14  La  Fayette,
15  Jefferson,
17  Endeavor,
19  Jackson,
Wilmington.
New  Castle.
Laurel.
Middletown.
Dover.
Milford.
Wilmington.
Georgetown.
Wilmington.
Lewes.
Milton.
Delaware  City.
1st  Thursday.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
3d  Wednesday.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
2d  &  4th  Thursdays,
Smiley  King.
A.  V.  Lesley,  M.D.
Rev.  Henry  C.  Fries.
Wm.  H.  Barr,  M.D.
John  A.  Nicholson.
Mark  A.  Greer.
Clement  B.  Clark.
Paynter  Frame.
Wm.  S.  Hayes.
Chas.  D.  Schellinger.
James  Ponder.
Benj.  N.  Ogle.
GRAND  CHAPTER.
Organized  January  19,  5818.
The  Grand  Chapter  meets  annually  at  Dover,  on  the  Monday  next  preceding
the  third  Tuesday  in  January.     This  Grand  Chapter  is  an  independent  body.
SUBORDINATE  CHAPTERS.
No.  Name.  Location.
1  Washington  and  La  Fayette,  Wilmington.
2  Temple,  Milford.
4     Hope,  Georgetown.
SUBSCRIBERS'  NAMES.
DELAWAEE  CITY.
Matchlett,  "Wm.  J.     Secretary,  Jackson,  19.
DOVER.
Nicholson,  John  A.,  Attorney  at  Law.     "W.  M.,  Union,  7.
Smith,  Rev.  Marshall  B.     Union,  7  ;  Chap.  91,  Pa.;  late  Comd'y,  4,  Pa.
MIDDLETOWN.
Barr,  Wm.  H.,  M.D.     W.  M.,  Union,  5.

--- Sayfa 123 ---
DELAWARE.  Ill
ST.  GEOKGE'S.
Peckard,  E.  H.,  Storekeeper.    Jackson,  19.
WILMINGTON.
Aikin,  E.  T.,  Gentleman.    P.  M.,  Temple,  11.
Allmond,  Charles  M.,  Hotel.    Union,  121,  Pa.
Britton,  John  H.,  Cigar  Manufacturer.    Grand  Tyler.
Buzine,  George,  Justice  of  the  Peace.     La  Payette,  14.
Douglass,  Benjamin,  Machinist.    Washington,  1.
Downward,  James,  Ropemaker.     Washington,  1.
Ford,  Stephen  D.,  Ironfounder.     La  Fayette,  14.
Franks,  Henry,  Farmer,  Brandywine  Hundred.    La  Fayette,  14.
Gear,  William  H.,  Book-keeper.     La  Fayette,  14 ;  Washington  chap.,  1.
Graves,  William,  Builder.     P.  Deputy  Grand  Master.
Hainsworth,  Henry  L.,  Machinist.    Washington,  1.
Hayes,  W.  S.,  Morocco  Manufacturer.    Grand  Secretary  Grand  Lodge  ;  La
Fayette,  14.
Hazard,  Albert  B.,  Farmer,  Oak  Hill.     La  Fayette,  14;  Washington  chap.,  1.
Hollinsworth,  S.  W.,  Jeweler.    Temple,  11.
Horner,  Edwin  J.,  Locomotive  and  Oar  Spring  Manufacturer.
Hyde,  Joseph,  Foreman  of  Depot  Machine  Shop.     Washington,  1.
King,  Smiley,  Farmer.    Washington,  1.
Krauch,  Christian,  Hotel-keeper.    Washington,  1.
Le  Fevre,  John  B.,  Farmer,  New  Castle.  St.  John's,  2 ;  Washington  chap.,  1 ;
Encampment  4,  Pa.
Lobdell,  George  G.,  Founder  and  Machinist.    Washington,  1.
McClintock,  Daniel,  Iron  Founder.     La  Fayette,  14.
McCombs,  James  C,  Book-keeper.      P.  M.,  La  Fayette,  14;   Washington
chap.,  1.
McFarlan,  Wm.  A.,  Manufacturer.    Washington,  1.
Morrison,  John  0.,  Farmer,  Hare's  Corner.    St.  John's,  2.
Reynolds,  Henry  F.,  Farmer,  Hare's  Corner.     St.  John's,  2.
Roff,  James,  Jr.,  Engineer.     Washington,  1.
Scott,  James,  Morocco  Manufacturer.    La  Fayette,  14.
Solomon,  John  J.,  Yictualer.     La  Fayette.  14.
Speakman,  Lewis,  Merchant.     Chester,  236,  Pa.
-  Stamm,  William,  Assistant  Engineer  U.  S.  Navy.    La  Fayette,  14 ;  Mt.  Horeb
chap.,  Va.
Talley,  Eli  B.,  Hotel-keeper.    La  Fayette,  14.
Teas,  Joseph,  Master  Machinist  for  P.  W.  and  B.  R.  R.  Co.    Washington,  1.
Thatcher,  Thomas,  Ship-joiner.    La  Fayette,  14.
Valentine,  J.  S.,  Merchant.     Washington,  1.
Walton,  Alfred,  Druggist.    La  Fayette,  14 ;  Washington  chap.,  1.
White,  William  H,  M.D.     Washington,  1.
Wiggins,  William  B.,  Mayor.     Washington,  1.
Zebley,  Thomas  W.,  Sashmaker.    Washington,  1.

--- Sayfa 124 ---
DISTRICT  OF  COLUMBIA.
GRAND  LODGE.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  the  District  of  Columbia  was  organized  December  11th,
5810.  It  holds  three  regular  Communications :  the  Annual  one  the  first  Tues-
day in  November,  the  Semi- Annual  the  first  Tuesday  in  May,  and  one  for  the
installation  of  officers  on  St.  John's  Day,  twenty-seventh  December.  The  Com-
munications are  held  in  the  City  of  Washington.  The  Grand  Lodge  consists
of  the  Grand  Officers,  Past  Grand  Officers,  Past  Masters,  and  Masters  and
Wardens  of  subordinate  Lodges,  or  their  legal  representatives.
The  revenue  of  the  Grand  Lodge  is  derived  from  the  following  sources : —
For  Dispensations  for  new  Lodges         ....      $15  00
For  Dispensations  to  revive  extinct  Lodges      .        .        .    15  00
For  Charters,  in  addition
25  00
For  Initiations
2  00
For  every  Master  Mason  returned  ....  50
There  are  11  subordinate  Lodges  in  this  jurisdiction.  The  returns  of  Novem-
ber 27,  5859,  give  the  number  of  Master  Masons,  776 ;  F.  C,  29 ;  E.  A.,  29.
The  returns  also  give  the  following  work  for  the  past  year :  Initiated,  117 ;
Passed,  128 ;  Raised,  129  ;  Admitted,  18  ;  Dimitted,  28 ;  Reinstated,  5 ;  Died,  6 ;
Dropped,  8 ;  Rejected,  15  ;  Expelled,  1 ;  Amount  of  dues  paid,  $612.
The  officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  for  the  present  Masonic  year,  elected  Novem-
ber 6,  5860,  are  :—
G.  C.  Whiting,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
Y.  P.  Page,  R.  W.  D.  Grand  Master.
W.  H.  Turpin,  R.  W.  Senior  Grand  Warden.
G.  A.  Hall,  R.  W.  Junior  Grand  Warden.
G.  A.  Schwakzman,  R.  W.  Grand  Secretary.
C.  Cammack,  Jr.,  R.  W.  Grand  Treasurer.
H.  N.  Steele,  Grand  Visitor  and  Lecturer.
Rev.  W.  D.  Haley,  Grand  Chaplain.
E.  J.  Holmead,  Grand  Marshal.
C.  M'Mathews,  Senior  Grand  Deacon.
J.  M.  Jewell,  Junior  Grand  Deacon.
W.  V.  M.  Weaver,  Grand  Sword  Bearer.
J.  Hood,  Grand  Pursuivant.
(112)

--- Sayfa 125 ---
DISTRICT  OF  COLUMBIA.
113
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.
No.
Time  op  Meeting.
Master.
1  Federal,
4  Wash'ton  Naval,
5  Potomac,
7  Lebanon,
9  New  Jerusalem,
10  Hiram,
11  St.  John's,
12  National,
14  Wash.  Centennial
15  B.  B.  French,
16  Dawson,
Washington.
Washington.
Georgetown,  D.  C.
Washington.
Washington.
Washington.
Washington.
Washington.
.Washington.
Washington.
Washington.
Alternate  Tuesdays.
1st  Saturday.
3d  Monday.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
2d  &  4th  Thursdays.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
Alternate  Tuesdays.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
G.  Alfred  Hall.
W.  E.  Hutchinson.
Jas.  Goszler.
Thos.  McGrath.
F.  A.  Jackson.
C.  L.  Alexander.
Christopher  Ingle.
S.  G.  Jamison.
A.  G.  Fowler.
E.  L.  Stevens.
S.  T.  Shugert.
GRAND  CHAPTER.
MARYLAND  AND  DISTRICT  OF  COLUMBIA.
Organized  November  10,  5814.
This  Grand  Chapter  is  a  subordinate  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter.  Its
Annual  Convocations  are  held  in  the  City  of  Baltimore,  commencing  on  the
second  Monday  in  November.  It  has  8  subordinates  under  its  jurisdiction.
The  returns,  published  in  the  annual  proceedings  of  5859,  show  a  total  of
Membership,  437 ;  P.  M.,  3;  Mark  Masters,  10  ;  M.  E.  M.,  5 ;  Withdrawn,  10 ;
Died,  3 ;  Amount  of  dues  paid  by  7  Chapters,  $265.
SUBORDINATE  CHAPTERS.
No.
Name.
Location.
Time  of  Meetins.
1 Concordia,
Baltimore.
1st  Tuesday.
7 Phenix,
Baltimore.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
8 Potomac,
Georgetown,  D.  C.
,
9 Jerusalem,
Baltimore.
1st  Wednesday.
15
Columbia,
Washington,  D.  C.
1st  &  3d  Wednesdays.
16
Washington,
Washington,  D.  C.
17
Chesapeake,
Salisbury,  Md.
2d  &  4th  Thursdays.
18
Salem,
Cumberland,  Md.
4th  Monday.
COMMANDERY.
There  is  but  one  Commandery  in  this  jurisdiction.  It  is  styled  Washington
Commandery  No.  1.,  and  is  located  at  the  City  of  Washington.  At  the  Trien-
nial Session  of  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the  United  States,  in  1859,  it  reported
109  members.

--- Sayfa 126 ---
114  world's  masonic  register.
SUBSCRIBERS'  NAMES.
GEOBGETOWU.
Amy  &  Shinn,  Bottlers  of  Porter,  Ale,  etc.  etc.    Potomac,  5  ;  Centennial,  14.
Davidson,  John  B.,  Commission  Merchant.     Potomac,  5.
Potomac  Lodge,  No.  5.     Regular  meetings  on  the  third  Monday  in  each
month.
Taylor,  W.  H.  S.,  Fifth  Auditor,  Boom  22.    Potomac,  5.
Thompson,  George.    P.  G.  T.,  Potomac,  5  ;  Secretary,  Chap.,  8.
HOPETOWN.
Holland,  J.  E.,  Parmer.    New  Jerusalem,  9.
WASHINGTON.
Alexander,  C.  M.,  Attorney  of  Patents  and  Law  Solicitor.    Dawson,  16.
Anderson,  Charles  H.,  Bookseller  and  Stationer,  458  7th  Street.    Federal,  1.
Anderson,  J.  L.,  Clerk  in  Pension  Office.    New  Jerusalem,  9.
Angus,  Job  W.,  Carpenter  and  House-builder,  562  7th  Street.  St.  John's,
11 ;  Columbia  chap.,  15  ;  Washington  com.,  1.
Baldwin  &  Brothers,  Contractors  and  Manufacturers.  Dawson,  16 ;  Chap.,
16 ;  Com.,  1.
Ball,  Chas.  G.,  Furnace  and  Range  Builder,  Union  Buildings,  E  Street.  Fed-
eral, 1.
Bartholow,  J.  L.,  Manufacturer  of  Agricultural  Implements  and  Dealer  in
Seeds,  etc.,  558  7th  Street.  Dawson,  16 ;  Washington  chap.,  16 ;  Washington
com.,  1.
Bartholow,  J.  P.,  Seed  and  Agricultural  Store,  558  7th  St.  Dawson,  16 ;
Chap.,  16  ;  Com.,  1.
Beardsley  &  Harvey,  General  Government  Agents  and  Solicitors  of  Patents,
492  7th  St.    Frontier  City,  422,  N.  Y.
Bell,  Samuel  P.,  Machinist  in  U.  S.  Patent  Office.  Treasurer,  Dawson,  16 ;
Chap.,  16 ;  J.  W.,  Com.,  1.
Boteler,  John  W.,  House  Furnishing  Warerooms,  Iron  Hall,  318  Pennsylvania
Avenue.     Federal,  1 ;  Columbia  chap.,  15.
Bowen,  Henry  S.,  Printer,  191  F  Street.     Federal,  1.
Clarke,  John  B.,  Washington.     Centennial,  14;  Washington  chap.,  16.
Cunningham,  C.  W.,  Plumber  and  Gas-fitter,  510  7th  Street.     Federal,  1.
Donoho,  Thos.,  Clerk  Nat.  Intelligencer.  Federal,  1 ;  R.  A.  C.  &  K.  T.  of
Washington  Commandery,  No.  1.
Edie,  Edward  C,  Clerk  in  Navy  Department.     St.  John's,  11.
Ellis,  Wm.  M.,  Eagle  Iron  Works.     P.  G.  M.,  Naval,  4;  Chap.,  16  ;  Com.,  1.
Emerson,  George  W.,  Butcher,  Centre  Market.     Hiram,  10.
Essex,  Josiah,  Master  Carpenter,  503  I  St.  Federal,  1 ;  Chap.,  15 ;  Com.,
1— 33d.
Everett,  Charles,  Solicitor  of  Patents.    Federal,  1  ;  Chap.,  15  ;  Com.,  1.

--- Sayfa 127 ---
DISTRICT   OF   COLUMBIA.  115
French,  Benjamin  B.,  Attorney  at  Law.  Born  at  Chester,  N.  H.,  September
4, 1800  ;  made  a  Master  Mason  in  King  Solomon's  Lodge,  New  London,  1826 ;
Master  of  Corinthian  Lodge,  Newport,  about  1830-33  ;  Grand  Master  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  D.  C,  1846  to  1853 ;  made  a  Eoyal  Arch  Mason  in  Washing-
ton, 1846,  (I  think,)  and  a  Knight  Templar  in  Brooklyn,  N.  Y.,  about  1847-8  ;
G.  H.  P.  of  Grand  Chapter  of  Md.  and  D.  C,  1852  to  1855 ;  P.  Grand  Com-
mander of  W.  Commandery ;  P.  G.  G.  Secretary  of  the  G.  G.  Chapter  of  U.  S.,
and  Grand  Commander  of  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the  U.  S.
Gassenheimer,  Leopold,  Clothier,  119  Penn.  Avenue.  Washington  Centen-
nial, 14 ;  Chap.,  15.
Gibbs,  Dr.,  J.  B.,  Dentist.  Washington  com.,  1.
Gibson,  J.  C,  Dealer  in  Fancy  and  Staple  Dry  Goods,  18  Louisiana  Avenue.
St.  John's,  11.
Green,  A.,  Auction  and  Commission  Merchant,  526  7th  St.     B.  B.  French,  15.
Greyson,  John,  Veterinary  Surgeon.     Hiram,  10  ;  Columbia  chap.,  16.
Hamilton,  Charles  J.,  Designer  and  Sculptor,  Union  Buildings,  E  Street.
Federal,  1.
Hare,  D.  0.,  Engraver,  264  Pennsylvania  Avenue.     Unaffiliated.
Harvey,  Thomas  L.     Dawson,  16  ;  Chap.,  16  ;  Com.,  1.
Heiberger,  F.  J.,  Merchant  Tailor.     B.  B.  French,  15.
Hoover,  Samuel  P.,  Boot,  Shoe,  and  Trunk  Store,  320  Pennsylvania  Avenue.
Federal,  1 ;  Columbia  chap.,  15  ;  Washington  com.,  1.  i
Hughes,  Evan,  Merchant  Tailor,  Penn.  Avenue.    Lebanon,  7.
Ingle,  Christopher,  Counselor  at  Law,  12  Louisiana  Avenue.  W.  M.,  St.
John's,  11 ;  Chap.,  15 ;  Com.,  1.
Jillard,  Geo.  E.,  Dealer  in  Paints,  Oils,  and  Glass,  254  Pennsylvania  Avenue.
St.  John's,  11.
Kennedy,  Geo.  W.  E.,  Wholesale  and  Retail  Dealer  in  Groceries,  Wines,  and
Liquors,  508  7th  Street.     Dawson,  16.
King,  Joshua  A.     St.  John's,  11.
Kloman,  Charles,  Bestaurant.     New  Jerusalem,  9.
Lane,  Marcus,  Attach^  to  Post  Office.    Dawson,  16 ;  Chap.,  16.
Magruder,  S.  C,  Dealer  in  Wood  and  Coal,  corner  of  6th  Street  and  Missouri
Avenue.    Washington  Centennial,  14.
Maynadier,  Wm.  M.     St.  John's,  11.
Noyes,  Henry  O.,  Machine  Sewing  Booms,  504  9th  Street.    Federal,  1.
Owen,  S.  W.,  Military  and  Naval  Tailor.     Federal,  1 ;  Chap.,  15.
Patten,  George,  Solicitor  of  Patents.     Dawson,  16.
Payne,  Charles  H.,  Flour  and  Feed  Store,  Centre  Market,  9th  Street.  Wash-
ington Centennial,  14 ;  Columbia  chap.,  15  ;  Washington  com.,  1.
Pettibone,  William,  Bookbinder.     St.  John's,  11.
Polkinhorn,  Henry,  Printer,  375  D  Street.    St.  John's,  11.
Poore,  Ben.  Perley,  Secretary  U.  S.  Agricultural  Society.  Hon.  member  St.
John's,  Newburyport,  Mass.     K.  H.     S.'.G.\J.-.G.\33d.
Pugh,  Wm.  G.,  Wholesaleand  Betail  Dealer  in  Groceries,  Wines,  and  Liquors,
508  7th  Street.     Dawson,  16.
Baub,  G.  T.,  Soap  and  Candle  Manufacturer,  cor.  15th  and  Ohio  Avenue.
New  Jerusalem,  9.

--- Sayfa 128 ---
116  world's  masonic  register.
Rhees,  William  J.,  Chief  Clerk  Smithsonian  Institute,  506  H  St.  P.  W.  M.,
Lebanon,  7  ;  Columbia  chap.,  14 ;  Washington  commandery,  1.
Riley,  John  C,  M.D.    St.  John's,  11.
Robbins,  Z.  C,  Office  of  Foreign  and  American  Patents,  (established,  1844.)
Dawson,  16  ;  Chap.,  16.
Scheifley,  Jacob.     St.  John's,  11.
Schmidt,  Jacob,  Restaurant,  489  6th  St.     Dawson,  16.
Schwarzman,  G.  A.,  Grand  Secretary  of  Grand  Lodge.
Semken,  H.,  Jeweler  and  Silversmith,  Penn.  Avenue.     Federal,  1.
Smith,  James  G.     St.  John's,  11 ;  H.  P.,  Chap.,  15.
Stansbury,  Charles  F.,  Solicitor  of  Patents.   S.  W.,  St.  John's,  11 ;  Chap.,  16.
Swan,  G.  W.,  Clerk  Evening  Star  Office.     St.  John's,  11.
Thomas,  George  C,  Attorney  at  Law.     Com.,  1.
Thompson,  G.  R.     Dawson,  16  ;  Chap.,  16  ;  Secretary.
Thompson,  W.  A.,  Engraver  U.  S.  Coast  Survey.     Dawson,  16.
Whfting,  George  C,  Commissioner  of  Pensions.  M.  W.  Grand  Master  ;  P.
M.,  B.  B.  French,  15 ;  Chap.,  15  ;  P.  G.  Commandery,  1;  S.\G.\J.\G.-.33d.
Williamson,  Jos.  B.,  Builder.     Federal,  1 ;  Columbia  chap.,  15.
THE  ROBBER  OF  THE  DESERT.
The  London  Freemasons'  Review  for  December,  1841,  contains  the  fol-
lowing anecdote,  which  is  another  evidence  of  the  influence  of  Masonic  phi-
lanthropy over  the  heart  of  the  barbarian.
"  It  is  now  some  twenty  years  since  Captain  E.,  late  a  member  of  one  of  the
English  Universities  Lodges,  was  traveling  in  Egypt.  The  Captain  was  accom-
panied by  his  servant,  an  active  and  intelligent  young  man ;  they  were  attacked
in  the  desert  by  the  Arabs  ;  the  Captain  made  a  very  resolute  stand,  and  slew
two  of  the  robbers.  He  was,  with  his  servant,  soon  overpowered,  and  they
were  conveyed  to  the  robbers'  retreat,  when  they  were  separated.  It  was  de-
termined that  the  Captain's  life  should  be  forfeited,  and  he  awaited  his  cruel
destiny  with  as  much  fortitude  as  a  brave  man  could  feel.  Instead  of  this  aw-
ful sentence,  he  was,  however,  agreeably  surprised  in  the  morning  by  his  serv-
ant's approach,  with  the  joyful  intelligence  that  his  sentence  was  not  only  remit-
ted, but  that  he  was  at  liberty  to  resume  his  journey ;  and  this  retributive  jus-
tice was  accompanied  by  the  restoration  of  every  article  of  the  property  of
which  he  had  previously  been  plundered.  Is  it  to  be  wondered  at,  that  his
gratitude  to  his  servant  ended  in  his  taking  early  steps  to  claim  a  nearer  associ-
ation to  him  as  a  Brother  in  the  Craft,  for  by  the  exchange  of  the  mysterious
secret,  the  robber  of  the  desert  had  kept  his  faith  with  a  Brother?  The  servant
and  the  Arab  were  both  Masons,  and  through  the  former  the  master  had  re-
ceived the  benefits  of  the  mystic  tie."

--- Sayfa 129 ---
FLORIDA.
GRAND  LODGE.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  Florida  was  organized  July  5th,  5830.  Its  Grand
Annual  Communications  are  held  in  the  City  of  Tallahassee,  commencing  on  the
second  Monday  in  January.  Its  membership  is  composed  of  the  Grand  Officers,
Past  Grand  Officers,  Past  Masters,  and  Masters  and  Wardens,  and  one  Repre-
sentative from  each  subordinate  Lodge,  who  must  be  a  Master  Mason.
The  revenue  of  the  Grand  Lodge  is  as  follows : —
For  a  Charter  or  Dispensation  for  a  new  Lodge      .        .     $50
For  every  initiation    1
For  every  member
1
There  are  34  subordinate  Lodges  in  this  jurisdiction,  which,  according  to  the
last  returns,  have  1497  members,  and  show  the  following  exhibit  of  work:  Ini-
tiated, 216;  Rejected,  73;  Expelled,  3;  Suspended,  3;  Withdrew,  6;  and  29  died
during  the  year.  Amount  of  dues  received,  $1571.  This  Grand  Lodge  has  re-
printed its  proceedings,  from  its  organization  in  1830  to  1859  inclusive.  The
following  is  a  constitutional  provision  of  this  Grand  Lodge.
"  It  shall  be  the  duty  of  every  subordinate  Lodge  under  the  jurisdiction  of
this  Grand  Lodge,  to  ascertain  and  keep  themselves  informed  of  the  number  of
children  of  Master  Masons  residing  within  their  respective  jurisdictions,  who
are  or  may  be  destitute  of  the  means  of  education ;  to  cause  them  to  be  in-
structed in  the  first  rudiments  of  a  general  English  education,  so  far  as  the
funds  of  such  Lodges  will  respectively  allow,  consistent  with  other  charities ;
and  to  report  to  the  Grand  Lodge,  annually,  the  number  of  such  children  and
the  measures  adopted  in  regard  to  them."
The  Officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Florida  for  the  present  Masonic  year  are
as  follows : —
D.  C.  Dawkins,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
F.  C.  Barrett,  R.  W.  Deputy  Grand  Master.
J.  L.  McKinnon,  R.  W.  Senior  Grand  Warden.
F.  Branch,  R.  W.  Junior  Grand  Warden.
John  B.  Tatlor,  R.  W.  Grand  Secretary.
Thos.  Hayward,  R.  W.  Grand  Treasurer.
John  Penny,  R.  W.  Grand  Chaplain.
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.
No
Name.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
1 Jackson,
Tallahassee.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
R.  A.  Shine.
2 Washington,
Quinoy.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
T.  T.  Henry.
3 Harmony,
Marianna.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
Geo.  F.  Baltzell.
(117)

--- Sayfa 130 ---
118
world's  masonic  register.
No.       Lodge.  Location.  Time  op  Meeting.  Master.
5  Hiram,  Monticello.  2d  &  4th  Saturdays.  Jas.  Ellenwood.
6  Franklin,  Apalachicola.  1st  &  3d  Thursdays.  Saml.  Benezet.
11  Madison,  Madison.  1st  &  3d  Weds.  R.  H.  Shaffer.
12  St.  John's,  St.  Augustine.  1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.  G.  J.  Zehnbauer.
15  Escambia,  Pensacola.  1st  &  3d  Saturdays.  James  Knowles.
16  Santa  Rosa,  Milton.  1st  &  3d  Saturdays.  John  Chain.
17  Eucheeanna,  Eucheeanna.  1st  &  3d  Saturdays.  Wm.  McDonald.
18  CentreTille,  Centreville.  2d  Saturday.  Wm.  J.  Felkel.
19  Marion,  Ocala.  1st  &  3d  Fridays.  A.  C.  Brown.
20  Solomon,  Jacksonville.  1st  &  3d  Weds.  Wm.  Lema.
21  Gee,  Chattahoochie.  2d  Saturday.  Jas.  S.  Meacham.
22  Hamilton,  Bellville.  2d  &  4th  Fridays.  J.  H.  Baker.
23  New  Port,  New  Port.  Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.  J.  B.  Carlisle.
24  Naval,  Warrenton.  1  st  Monday.  Wm.  Morrill.
25  Hillsborough,  Tampa.  1st  &  3d  Saturdays.  J.  Darling.
26  Alachua,  Newnansville.  1st  &  3d  Saturdays.  S.  Fagan.
28  Concordia,  Gadsden  Co.  1st  Saturday.  N.  J.  Scott.
29  Micanopy,  Micanopy.  2d  Saturday  W.  H.  Johnson.
30  Suwannee,  Suwannee  Shoals.       1st  Saturday.  R.  Brown.
31  Manatee,  Manatee.  1st  Thursday.  E.  Glazier.
33  Jefferson,  Waukeenah.  1st  &  3d  Saturdays.  W.  H.  Arendell.
37  Orient,  Jasper.  1st  &  3d  Saturdays.  H.  J.  Stewart.
88  Chipola,  Jackson  Co.  2d  Saturday.  S.  J.  Erwin.
39  Mackey,    2d  &  4th  Saturdays.  J.E.Fletcher.
40  Orion,  Knox  Hill.  2d  Saturday.  D.  P.  Everett.
41  Gainesville,  Gainesville.  1st  Friday.  T.  J.  Myers.
43  Moseley,    1st  &  3d  Saturdays.  W.  H.  Sever.
44  Miccosukie,  Miccosukie.  1st  Saturday.  R.  M.  Burney.
45  True  Brotherh'd,   1st  Saturday.  A.  H.  McCormick.
48  Douglass,  White  Springs.  2d  &  4th  Fridays.  Robt.  Brown.
49  Marston,    2d  &  4th  Saturdays.  Chas.  Slager.
GRAND  CHAPTER.
Organized  January  11th,  5847.
This  Grand  Chapter  holds  its  Annual  Convocations  in  the  City  of  Tallahassee,
commencing  on  the  second  Monday  in  January.  This  Grand  Chapter  is  an  inde-
pendent body.  Its  has  8  subordinate  Chapters  under  its  jurisdiction.  Number
of  members,  per  last  returns,  288.    Amount  of  dues,  $307.
SUBORDINATE  CHAPTERS.
No.
Name.
Location.
No.
Name.
Location.
1 Florida,
Tallahassee.
7
Quincy,
Quincy
3 Magnolia,
Apalachicola.
10
Olive,
Ocala.
5 Jefferson,
Monticello.
13
Alachua,
Newnansville.
6 Santa  Rosa,
Milton.
15
Greenwood,
Greenwood.

--- Sayfa 131 ---
FLORIDA.
119
GRAND  COUNCIL.
Organized  January,  5858.
There  are  6  subordinate  Councils  in  this  jurisdiction.    Number  of  members,
estimated  January,  5860,  150.
SUBORDINATE  COUNCILS.
Location.
No.
Name.
Location.
Tallahassee.
4 Overman,
Milton.
Lake  City.
5 Alachua,
Newnansville,
Jacksonville.
6 Hayward,
Ocala.
No.       Namb.
1  Mackey,
2  Columbia,
3  Douglass,
There  is  but  one  Commandery  in  Florida,  which  was  organized  under  a  dis-
pensation March  17th,  1850.  The  dispensation  was  extended  September  29th,
1853,  and  again  extended  March  17th,  1857.  The  Commandery  made  no  returns
to  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the  TJ.  S.,  under  whose  authority  it  exists,  at  its
Triennial  Session  in  September,  1859.  This  Commandery  is  located  at  Quincy,
and  is  styled  De  Molay  Commandery  No.  1,  if  it  is  yet  in  existence.
SUBSCRIBERS'  NAMES.
Barrett,  Frederick  C,  Merchant,  Jacksonville.  P.  M.  Solomon's,  20 ;  Jack-
sonville chap.,  12  ;  P.  S.  G.  W.
Berrill,  John  R.,  Newnansville.     Alachua,  26.
Flagg,  George,  Merchant,  Jacksonville.  Solomon's,  20 ;  Jacksonville  chap.,
12.
Hearn,  Michael,  Merchant,  Jacksonville.     Solomon's,  20.
Payne,  J.  M.,  M.D.,  Flemington.     True  Brotherhood,  45 ;  Olive  chap.,  10.
Prevatt,  Thomas  J.,  Register  of  Land  Office,  Newnansville.  Alachua,  26  ;
Alachua  chap.,  13.
Sammis,  John  S.,  Planter,  Jacksonville.  P.  S.  "W.  Solomon's,  20 ;  Jackson-
ville chap.,  12  ;  Douglass  coun.,  3.
Scarborough,  Lindley  M.,  Merchant,  Newnansville.     R.  A.  M.
George  Washington,  born  February  22,  1731 ;  initiated  November  4,  1752  ;
passed  Fellow  Craft,  March  3,  1753;  raised  Master  Mason,  August  4,  1753;
all  in  Fredericksburg  Lodge,  No.  4,  Fredericksburg,  Virginia.  Died  December
14, 1799,  and  was  buried,  December  16,  at  Mount  "Vernon,  with  Masonic  honors.

--- Sayfa 132 ---
GEORGIA.
GRAND  LODGE.
The  date  of  the  organization  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Georgia  is  not  known.
It  is  certain  that  Freemasonry  was  established  in  the  State  almost  coequal  with
its  settlement  as  a  colony.  Distinguished  writers  assert  that  as  early  as  5730  a
Lodge  was  instituted  in  Georgia.  The  records  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England
show  that  in  December,  5733,  the  new  colony  in  Georgia  was  recommended  to
the  benevolence  of  the  Lodges  by  the  Deputy  Grand  Master,  and  it  is  on  record
that  considerable  donations  were  collected  and  distributed  among  distressed
Masons,  to  encourage  the  settlement  of  the  new  colony,  just  established  at  Geor-
gia in  America.  There  is  a  tradition  that  the  first  Masonic  Lodge  ever  held  in
the  State  of  Georgia  was  constituted  and  opened  by  General  James  Oglethorpe,
during  the  year  5733,  under  a  large  oak-tree,  which  stood  near  the  corner  of
Bay  and  Drayton  Streets,  Savannah,  and  was  called  "  King  Solomon's  Lodge."
There  is,  however,  another  tradition,  and  tolerably  well  authenticated,  that  a
Lodge  was  at  work  in  Savannah  before  Solomon's  Lodge  had  an  existence.  It
appears  that  a  commission  was  issued  to  Roger  Lacy,  as  Provincial  Grand  Mas-
ter, in  5730,  prior  to  his  leaving  England  for  the  new  colony,  which  commission
was  subsequently  renewed  or  the  authority  continued.
The  Grand  Lodge  was  reorganized  as  an  independent  Grand  Lodge,  Decem-
ber 16th,  5786.  The  Grand  Ledge  consists  of  the  Masters  of  the  Constituted
Lodges,  the  Past  Grand  Masters,  Past  Deputy  Grand  Masters,  Past  Grand
Wardens,  and  Past  Masters  who  have  actually  presided  as  Master  one  year
within  the  jurisdiction.  The  Annual  Communications  of  the  Grand  Lodge  are
held  in  the  City  of  Macon,  commencing  on  the  last  Wednesday  in  October.
Its  revenue  is  derived  from  the  following  sources : —
For  a  Warrant
$70
For  Dispensations  to  hold  Lodges  .
For  Dispensations  to  hold  elections     .
For  Dispensations  to  confer  two  degrees
For  Dispensations  to  Initiate,  Pass,  or  Raise
For  Dispensations  to  make  more  than  five
For  Dispensations  for  any  other  purpose
For  Initiations
For  every  Master  Mason     ....
The  officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  for  the  present  Masonic  year,  elected  No-
vember, 5860,  are  as  follows : —
William  S.  Rockwell,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
Samuel  D.  Ikvin,  Deputy  Grand  Master,  First  District.
"  John  Harris,  Deputy  Grand  Master,  Second  District.
(120)
15
3
10
5
5
1
1
1

--- Sayfa 133 ---
GEORGIA.
121
W.  W.  Botd,  Deputy  Grand  Master,  Third  District.
David  E.  Butler,  Deputy  Grand  Master,  Fourth  District.
B.  T.  Turner,  Senior  Grand  Warden.
William  A  Love,  Junior  Grand  Warden.
Joseph  E.  Wells,  Grand  Treasurer.
Simri  Bose,  Grand  Secretary.
B.  B.  Bussell,  Grand  Senior  Deacon.
T.  H.  West,  Grand  Junior  Deacon.
William  B.  Jones,  Grand  Marshal.
B.  H.  Mitchell,  Grand  Pursuivant.
N.  Athon,  Grand  Chaplain.
D.  S.  Harrison,  First  Grand  Steward.
D.  G.  Candler,  Second  Grand  Steward.
Isaac  B.  Huff,  Third  Grand  Steward.
James  V.  Greer,  Grand  Tyler.
No.       Lodge.
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.
Location.  Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
I  Solomon's,
1  Social,
2  Stith,
3  Benevolent,
4  Rising  Star,
5  Macon,
6  Golden  Fleece,
7  Columbian,
8  Orion,
9  Mount  Hope,
10  Olive,
II  Franklin,
12  Cross,
13  Americus,
14  Marion,
15  Zerrubbabel,
16  Hamilton,
17  Darley,
18  Monroe,
19  Washington,
20  GenerousWarren,Monroe.
21  Hiram,  Florence.
22  Mount  Vernon,
23  La  Fayette,
24  Albany,
25  Philomathea,
26  Meridian  Sun,
27  Morning  Star,
28  Union,
29  Madison,
Savannah.
Augusta.
Sparta.
Milledgeville.
Eatonton.
Macon.
Covington.
Columbus.
Bainbridge.
Hawkinsville.
Talbotton.
Warrenton.
Lumpkin.
Americus.
Tazewell.
Savannah.
Hamilton.
Fort  Gaines.
Forsyth.
Cuthbert.
Athens.
Washington.
Albany.
Elberton.
Griffin.
Thorn  as  ton.
La  Grange.
Madison.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
2d  Friday.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Friday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
4th  Saturday.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
4th  Saturday.
2d  &  4th  Thursdays
2d  Saturday.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
2d  Friday.
1st  Thursday.
4th  Friday.
4th  Tuesday.  •
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
1st  Tuesday.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Friday  before  f .  m.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
2d  Friday.
G.  W.  Adams.
S.  D.  Heard.
J.  T.  Martin.
E.  P.  Watkins.
J.  A.  Etheridge.
G.  S.  Obear.
J.  Harris.
W.  R.  Jones.
J.  W.  Evans.
0.  C.  Home.
J.  M., Mathews.
J.  B.  Huff.
W.  R.  Thornton.
W.  T.  Toole.
N.  M.  Holten.
.  E.  W.  Buker.
A.  F.  Johnson.
W.  A.  Graham.
R.  L.  Roddy.
G.  L.  Barry.
F.  S.  Colley.
Wm.  Carter.
R.  M.  Smith.
M.  G.  Robert.
F.  M.  Thompson.
J.  A.  Trenchard.
W.  B.  Seay.
W.  W.  Hartsfield.
W.  B.  Jones.
W.  B.  Fitzpatrick.

--- Sayfa 134 ---
122
world's  masonic  register.
No.
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
30  Amity,
31  Montgomery,
32  St.  Patrick's,
33  Kennesaw,
34  San  Marino,
35  Houston,
36  Unity,
37  Fraternal,
38  Blue  Mountain,
39  Newborn,
40  Ebenezer,
41  Pythagoras,
42  Concord,
43  West  Point,
44  Lafayette,
46  Washington,
47  Oglethorpe,
48  Jackson,
49  St.  Thomas,
50  Jasper,
51  Hiram,
52  St.  Patrick's,
53  Mt.  Moriah,
54  Clinton,
55  Knoxville,
56  Burns,
57  Greenville,
58  Hamilton,
59  Atlanta,
60  Coweta,
61  Chattahoochee,
62  Randolph,
63  Georgetown,
64  Mt.  Moriah,
65  Traveller's  Rest.
66  Cherokee,
67  Dawson,
68  Dawson,
69  Carroll,
70  Erin,
71  Oxford,
72  Villa  Rica,
73  Alcova,
74  Unity,
75  Laurens,
76  Campbellton,
77  Canton,
78  Lincolnton,
79  Few,
Watkinsville.
Zebulon.
Danville.
Marietta.
Greensboro'.
Perry.
Jefferson.
McDonough.
Dahlonega.
Newborn.
Ebenezer.
Decatur.
Concord.
West  Point.
Lafayette.
Pondtown.
Columbus.
Hickory  Grove.
Thomasville.
Monticello.
Danburg.
Louisville.
Fayetteville.
Savannah.
Knoxville.
Lanier.
Greenville.
Sandersville.
Atlanta,  Fulton  co.
Newnan.
Franklin.
Pumpkintown.
Georgetown.
Woodstock.
.Montezuma.
Rome.
Crawfordville.
Social  Circle.
Carrollton.
Erin.
Oxford.
Villa  Rica.
Newton  Factory.
Palmetto.
Dublin.
Campbellton.
Canton.
Lincolnton.
Buena  Vista.
1st  Friday.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
1st  Wednesday.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
1st  Tuesday.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
2d  Friday.
1  st  Friday.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
1st  Saturday.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
4th  Friday.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
Sat.  on  or  after  f.  m.
1st  Friday.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
2d  &  4th  Weds.
2d  &4th  Thursdays.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
2d  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
3d  Wednesday.
1st  &  2d  Fridays.
2d  &  3d  Tuesdays.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
4th  Saturday.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
1st  Tuesday.
4th  Saturday.
J.  C.  Johnson.
H.  Greene.
W.  W.  Boyd.
J.  L.  Brown.
P.  B.  D.  H.  Culler.
R.  J.  Millican.
F.  D.  Manson.
N.  F.  Howard.
E.  Elliot.
J.  P.  Evans.
W.  E.  Griffin.
S.  T.  Whitaker.
Wm.  P.  Lester.
J.  L.  Greene.
J.  M.  Hughes.
J.  J.  Wellons.
A.  Deckel.
F.  M.  Swanson.
G.  B.  Bunch.
W.  H.  Looney.
Wm.  F.  Parker.
A.  J.  McAfee.
J.  D.  Frederick.
A.  P.  Mooty.
Wm.  Hodges.
Thos.  W.  Beaumont.
J.  T.  Dent.
C.  W.  Mabry.
R.  M.  Puckett.
L.  P.  Dozier.
A.  Carter.
D.  S.  Harmon.
O.  M.  Hood.
S.  H.  Perkins.
C.  H.  Shipp.
W.  W.  Merrill.
Wm.  N.  Coppedge.
J.  S.  Stewart.
J.  T.  Slaughter.
J.  Webb.
J.  T.  Bell.
F.  H.  Rowe.
G.  Cook.
E.  G.  GramliDg.
T.  D.  Collars.
E.  M.  Butt.

--- Sayfa 135 ---
GEORGIA.
123
No.
Location.
Tims  of  Meeting.
Master.
80  Weston,
81  Oak  Bowery,
82  W.  P.  Arnold,
83  Zaradatha,
84  Lithonia,
85  Daniel,
86  Magnolia,
87  Jonesboro',
88  Pinta,
89  El  Dorado,
90  Ringgold,
91  Western,
92  Castens,
93  St.  Mark's,
94  New  River,
95  Eureka,
96  Liberty  Union,
97  Euharlee,
98  Houston,
99  Siloam,
100  St.  John's,
101  Cartersville,
102  Rose,
103  Pleasant  Ridge,
104  Montpelier,
105  Dalton,
106  Quitman,
107  Thurmond,
108  Chappel,
109  Summerville,
110  Fort  Valley,
111  Stone  Mountain,
112  Walton,
113  Tallapoosa.
114  Alleghany,
115  Troup  Factory,
116  Wornam,
117  Farmer's,
118  Kimb rough,
120  Mackey,
121  Caledonia,
122  Williamsville,
123  Baber,
124  Furlow,
125  Jason  Burr,
126  St.  Mary's,
127  Ancient  York,
128  Union,
129  Ficklin,
Hard  Money.
Ellijay.
Wrightsboro'.
Lexington.
Lithonia.
Island  Creek.
Blakely.
Jonesboro'.
Barnesville.
Prattsburg.
Welden.
Lafayette.
Pleasant  Hill.
Oak  Ridge.
Corinth.
Starkville.
Taylor's  Creek.
Van  Wert.
Houston.
Snapping  Shoals.
Raysville.
Cartersville.
Whitesville.
Grangerville  P.  O.
Russelville.
Dalton.
Ringgold.
Hillsboro'.
Chapel  Hill.
Summerville.
Fort  Valley.
Stone  Mountain.
Shady  Dale.
Tallapoosa.
Blairsville.
Troup  Factory.
Clinton.
Vienna.
Muscogee.
Cave  Spring.
Cedar  Town.
Flat  Shoals.
White  Plains.
Plains  of  Dura.
Mountville.
St.  Mary's.
Sandy  Ridge.
Quito.
Butler.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Tuesday.
2d  Friday.
1st  &  8d  Tuesdays.
1st  Friday.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
1st  &  2d  Saturdays.
Friday  b.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
1st  Friday.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
2d  Friday.
2d  Friday.
Last  Sat.  b.  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Thursday.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
4th  Saturday.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
2d  &  4th  Weds.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
3d  Friday.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
1st  Tuesday.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
2d  Saturday.
3d  Tuesday.
3d  Friday.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
3d  Wednesday.
2d  Saturday.
Alternate  Fridays.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
9
N.  B.  Hall.
R.  R.  Hunt.
F.  P.  Brown.
W.  R.  Pendley.
A.  J.  Butts.
S.  S.  Stafford.
G.  S.  Warren.
A.  P.  Turner.
M.  Dickson.
M.  Patrick.
R.  A.  Lane.
A.  H.  Brown.
J.  P.  Clayton.
J.  T.  Hall.
G.  M.  Stokes.
S.  B.  Smith.
S.  A  Borders.
B.  L.  Harris.
H.  H.  Harvey.
J.  M.  Dill.
S.  W.  Thompson.
W.  L.  Worrell.
M.  J.  McMullen.
W.  R.  Harden.
D.  J.  Haney.
W.  L.  Whitman.
A.  C.  Standifer.
John  Hightower.
A.  Johnston.
D.  N.  Austin.
E.  W.  Hoyle.
D.  F.  George.
J.  M.  Janes.
A.  Young.
J.  J.  Talley.
R.  W.  Bonner.
■0.  P.  Swearingen.
J.  H.  Harrison.
A.  S.  Ford.
W.  F.  Janes.
T.  J.  Irvin.
T.  Hightower.
W.  J.  Parker.
E.  Baker.
R.  C.  Evans.
J.  Bransford.
J.  E.  Rosser.

--- Sayfa 136 ---
124
WORLD'S   MASONIC   REGISTER.
No.
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
Master.
130  Salem,
131  Lawrenceville,
132  Long  Cane,
133  Mount  Hickory,
134  Hunter,
135  Fergus,
136  Cassville,
137  Mallorysville,
138  Howard,
139  King  David's,
140  Claremont,
141  Charity,
142  Haralson,
143  Southwestern,
144  Ellerslie,
145  Cohutta,
146  Jas.  Kivlin,
147  SulphurSprings,
148  Phi  Delta,
149  Woodbury,
150  Carmel,
151  Wellington,
152  Sharon  Grove,
153  Springville,
154  Oothcaloga,
155  Chandler,
156  Harmony,
157  Pineville,
158  Irving,
.  159  Bowenville,
160  Harmony,
161  Tallulah,
162  Joppa,
163  Satilla,
164  Twiggs,
165  Roswell,
166  Webb,
167  Floyd  Springs,
168  Adairsville,
169  Mount  Ebal,
170  Emory,
171  Philadelphus,
172  Ooapalico,
173  Patrick  Henry,
174  Holt,
175  Zabud,
176  Acworth,
177  Pine  Grove,
178  Philologia,
Culloden.
Lawrenceville.
Long  Cane.
Farmersville.
Marshalville.
Logansville.
Cassville.
Mallorysville.
Maxey's  Depot.
Culloden.
Liberty  Hill.
Lisbon.
Haralson.
Oglethorpe.
Ellerslie.
Spring  Place.
Mulberry  Grove.
White  Sulphur.
Prattsville.
Woodbury.
Irwinton.
Wellington.
Sharon  Grove.
Springville.
Calhoun.
Jamestown.
McLendon's  Store.
Pineville.
Chickasawhatchee.
Bowenville.
Appling.
Tallulah.
Glade.
Douglas.
Marion.
Roswell.
Augusta.
Floyd  Springs.
Adairsville.
Fayetteville.
St.  Cloud.
Penfield.
Ooapalico.
Drayton.
Quebec.
New  Market.
Acworth.
Bear  Creek.
Sheffield.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
1st  Tuesday.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
1  st  Saturday.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
2d  Friday.
2d  Thursday.
Monday  pre.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
2d  Friday.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
1st  Saturday.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Friday.
1st  Friday.
1st  Saturday.
4th  Saturday.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
2d  &  4th  Thursdays.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
2d  Saturday.
Fri.  on  or  a.  f.  m.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
2d  Tuesday.
2d  Friday.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
4  th  Monday.
2d  Saturday.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays. .
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
1st  Tuesday.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
2d  Saturday.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
4th  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
C.  H.  Smith.
W.  F.  Kennedy.
J.  S.  Hill.
J.  M.  Hamilton.
J.  A.  Hafer.
E.  Palmer.
Thos.  A.  Ward.
J.  M.  Brightwell.
T.  B.  Settler.
C.  S.  Florence.
J.  D.  Culpepper.
E.  T.  Cokey.
N.  Passmore.
M.  L.  Osborne.
F.  J.  S.  Kimbrough.
W.  M.  Ash.
W.  W.  Beechum.
S.  F.  Player.
F.  L.  Nolan.
B.  Maynard.
N.  Mathews.
G.  J.  Fain.
E.  B.  Arnold.
J.  W.  Hall.
J.  C.  Lennard.
A.  B.  Davis.
J.  D.  Green.
J.  H.  Wiley.
D.  C.  Smith.
J.  M.  Wilcox.
J.  Glover.
W.  S.  Grogan.
J.  H.  Mead.
J.  E.  Patman.
J.  M.  Veach.
L.  T.  Thompson.
E.  T.  Davis.
T.  P.  Janes.
J.  Delk.
W.  F.  Smith.
A.  J.  Williams.
G.  W.  Hansford.
C.  Drake.
D.  W.  Fife.
J.  W.  B.  Summers.

--- Sayfa 137 ---
GEORGIA.
125
Time  op  Meetinq.
Master.
179  Trenton,
180  Fairburn,
181  Milford,
182  Dallas,
183  High  Falls,
184  St.  John  Baptist,
185  Cool  Spring,
186  Carnesville,
187  Center,
188  Marshall,
189  Herman,
190  Baker,
191  Rockwell,
192  G.  L.  Barry,
193  Coffee,
194  Worth,
195  Holmesville,
196  Trader's  Hill,
197  Wells,
198  Millwood,
199  Lumber  City,
200  Eastern  Light,
201  Ocoee,
202  Tunnel  Hill,
203  Ashler,
204  And.  J.  Miller,
205  Hickory  Flat,
206  Bowdon,
207  Armonia,
208  Hudson,
209  Alapahaw,
210  Brookline,
211  Butler,
212  Irwin,
213  Ogechee,
214  Ocean,
215  Gaulding,
216  Fulton,
217  Waresborough,
218  Simon  Holts
219  Gainesville,
220  Picken's  Star,
221  Sonora,
222  Etowah,
223  Smith,
224  Copia,
225  Attapulgus,
226  Fort  Early,
227  Altamaha,
Trenton.
Fairburn.
Milford.
Dallas.
Cross  Ridge.
Troupville.
Cool  Spring.
Carnesville.
Union.
Preston.
Hartwell.  i
Newton.
Mulberry.
Brooks  ville.
Jacksonville.
Isabella.
Holmesville.
Trader's  Hill.
Colaparchee.
Millwood.
Lumber  City.
Telfair.
Morgantown.
Tunnel  Hill.
Concord.
Thompson.
Hickory  Flat.
Bowdon.
Duncansville.
Glades  y.  Roads.
Troublesome.
Brookline.
Milltown.
Irwinville.
Ogechee.
Brunswick.
Dublin.
Atlanta.
Waresborough.
Colquitt.
Gainesville.
Jasper.
Sonora.
Barretsville.
Richland.
Magnolia.     .
Decatur  co.
Warwick.
Johnson's  Station.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
1st  Tuesday.
1st  Saturday.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
1st  Tuesday.
4th  Monday.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Friday.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
1st  Friday.
1st  Saturday.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
3d  Friday.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Monday.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Saturday  bef.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
3d  Friday.
1st  Friday.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Thursday.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
3d  Saturday.
Friday  bef.  f.  moon.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
2d  &  4th 'Saturday s.
Friday  aft.  f.  moon.
A.  H.  Smith.
J.  Brassell.
J.  H.  Ham.
J.  II.  Weaver.
S.  J.  Bankston.
C.  H.  Howell.
J.  R.  Coombs.
J.  B.  Estes.
D.  Bartlett.
J.  G.  M.  Ball.
F.  B.  Hodges.
J.  W.  Solomons.
A.  M.  Reynolds.
B.  F.  Brooks.
A.  M.  McDuffie.
D.  McLellan.
J.  F.  Hall.
R.  A.  Baker.
D.  B.  Searcy.
W.  B.  Cone.
C.  J.  Shelton.
J.  H.  Huggins.
J.  M.  Reever.
B.  G.  Hooks.
A.  L.  Massingle.
W.  B.  L.  Puckett,
M.  H.  Westbrook.
R.  Williams.
E.  P.  Herron.
J.  P.  Z.  Higdon.
W.  J.  Cox.
W.  Goodfrey.
D.  T.  McCall.
G.  Hurd.
L.  H.  Greenleaf.
J.  C.  Brassell.
D.  Mayer.
C.  L.  Walker.
F.  G.  Sitton.
S.  Stephens.
W.  T.  Day.
D.  G.  King.
S.  C.  Johnson.
J.  Bridges.
J.  L.  Morgan.
,  J.  A.  Towers.
J.  G.  Brown.
B.  P.  Harrington.

--- Sayfa 138 ---
126
OEORGIA.
Lodge.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
228  Yellow  River,
229  P.  T.  Schley,
230  Mineral  Springs,
231  An.  Landmarks,
232  Mountain,
233  Oman,
234  Duncan,
235  Alpharetta,
236  Shalto,
237  Blackshear,
238  Camilla,
239  Cassia.
Yellow  River.         1st  &  3d  Saturdays.       H.  W.  Mills.
Dawson.                  1st  &  3d  Saturdays.       J.  L.  Weston.
Sumpter  County       B.  J.  Head.
Savannah.
Mountain  P.  0.
Kingston.
Nashville.
Alpharetta.
Quitman.
Blackshear.
Camilla.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
C.  A.  Gordon.
J.  Harper.
A.  A.  Terhune.
W.  J.  Mabry.
GRAND  CHAPTER.
Organized  February  4th,  5822.
This  Grand  Chapter  holds  its  annual  Convocations  in  the  City  of  Augusta,
on  the  last  Wednesday  in  April.  It  is  subordinate  to  the  General  Grand  Chap-
ter. At  the  Annual  Convocation  in  5859,  there  were  44  subordinate  Chapters  in
this  jurisdiction ;  the  returns  of  which  give  1682  members :  Exalted,  during  the
year,  204;  Affiliated,  32;  Rejected,  14;  Resigned,  84;  Suspended,  12;  Expelled,
1 ;  Died,  22.    Amount  of  dues,  $1789  93.
SUBORDINATE  CHAPTERS.
No.       Name.
1  Athens,
2  Augusta,
3  Savannah,
4  Constantine,
5  Hiram,
6  Temple,
7  Darley,
8  Clinton,
9  Columbian,
10  Pythagoras,
11  St.  John's,
12  Lafayette,
13  Cherokee,
15  Albany,
16  Mount  Zion,
17  L.  Dwelle,
18  Perry,
20  Franklin,
21  Warren,
22  Carrollton,
23  Hudson,
Location.
Athens.
Augusta.
Savannah.
Macon.
Forsyth.
Milledgeville.
Columbus.
Talbotton.
Washington.
Griffin.
Lagrange.
Fort  Gaines.
Marietta.
Albany.
Atlanta.
Lumkin.
Fort  Valley.
Eatonton.
Warrenton.
Carrollton.
Ellaville.
Time  op  Meeting.
2d  Thursday.
3d  Wednesday.
2d  &  4th  Wednesdays.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
1st  Friday.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
1st  Tuesday.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
2d  Saturday.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
2d  Saturday.
1st  &  3d  Wednesdays.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
1st  Wednesday.
2d  Tuesday. '
4th  Saturday.

--- Sayfa 139 ---
GEORGIA.
127
No.       Name.
Location.
Time  of  Meetino.
24  Western,
25  Oliver,
26  Rome,
27  Greensboro',
28  McDonough,
29  Thomaston,
30  P.  T.  Schley,
31  Cuthbert,
32  Lithonia,
33  Haynes,
34  Newnan,
35  Zebulon,
36  Etowah,
37  Fayetteville,
38  Chattahoochee,
39  Mount  Vernon,
40  Walton,
41  Adoniram,
42  Wells.
43  Dawson,
44  Thomasville,
45  Wm.  J.  Johnson,
Dalton.
Elberton.
Eome.
Greensboro'.
McDonough.
Thomaston.
Hamilton.
Cuthbert.
Lithonia.
Sandersville.
Newnan.
Zebulon.
Cartersville.
Fayetteville.
Franklin.
Lawrenceville.
Monroe.
Cedartown.
Americus.
Covington.
Thomasville.
Blakely.
1st  Thursday.
3d  Friday.
1st  Tuesday.
3d  Friday.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
4th  Friday.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
3d  Friday.
1st  &  3d  Wednesdays.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
2d  Wednesday.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
4th  Friday.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
1st  Monday.
Friday  before  1st  Saturday.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Monday  before  1st  Tuesday.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
GRAND  COUNCIL.
There  is  a  Grand  Council  in  Georgia,  organized  in  5825.  We  have  taken
more  than  ordinary  pains  to  procure  a  copy  of  its  proceedings,  and  have  written
more  than  once  to  obtain  the  requisite  information,  yet  without  success.  Prom
the  sources  at  our  command,  we  find  that  there  were  15  subordinate  Councils  in
Georgia  in  5859,  having  471  members,  and  that  the  following  returns  were  made :
Received  and  greeted  during  the  year,  87;  Affiliated,  1;  Dimitted,  20;  Ex-
pelled, 1 ;  Died,  3.
GRAND  COMMANDERY.
A  letter  from  B.  B.  French,  M.  E.  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Encampment
of  the  U.  S.,  under  date  of  October  27th,  1860,  informs  us  that  he  had  issued
the  necessary  authority  for  the  formation  of  the  Grand  Commandery  of  Georgia,
but  had  received  no  returns  of  its  organization.  There  were  four  Commanderies
in  Georgia,  having  207  members.
SUBORDINATE  COMMANDERIES.
No.       Name.  Location.
3  St.  Aldemar.         Columbus.
4  Coeur  de  Lion,       Atlanta.
No.       Name.
Location.
1     Georgia,
Augusta.
2     St.  Omer,
Macon.

--- Sayfa 140 ---
world's  masonic  register.
SUBSCRIBERS'  NAMES.
ATHENS.
Hon.  Howell  Cobb,  Secretary  of  Treasury.  P.  M.,  Mt.  Vernon,  22  j  Athena
chap.,  1 ;  33d  Supreme  Council,  Southern  Jurisdiction,  U.  S.
COLUMBUS.
Smith,  George  A.  B.,  Secretary  and  Treasurer  of  the  Mobile  and  Girard  Bail-
road.  Secretary  of  Oglethorpe,  47 ;  Secretary  of  Darley  chap.,  7 ;  Recorder
Hope  conn.,  4 ;  Commandery,  3.
WEST  POINT.
Means,  L.  S.,  M.D.     S.  W.  West  Point,  43.
Woolcox,  I.  M.,  Confectioner  and  Express  Agent.     D.  P.  M.  West  Point,  43.
THOMASVILLE.
Wolff,  Herman,  Merchant.    Albany,  24  ;  Albany  chap.,  15.
(SAVANNAH.
Barrit,  James,  Coaster.     Solomon's,  1.
Bradley,  Amos  J.,  Planter.     Clinton,  54.
Cox,  William,  Tailor.  P.  M.,  Solomon's,  1;  P.  M.,  Clinton,  54;  P.  8,
Georgia  chap.,  3 ;  R.  and  S.  M.  Georgia  coun.,  2.
Edwards,  Thos.,  Liquor  Dealer.     Clinton,  54.
Galloway,  David  H.,  County  Officer  and  Notary  Public.     Sect'y  Clinton,  54.
Geil,  Nicholas,  Planter.     Zerubbabel,  15.
Glitcsh,  Conrad,  Cabinet-maker.     Zerubbabel,  15.
Graham,  Jonathan,  Dealer  in  Fruits,  Confectionery  and  Toys,  corner  Congress
and  Drayton  Sts.    Zerubbabel,  15.
Hayne,  Harry.     Clinton,  54.
Henderson,  Thomas,  Cabinet-maker,  Undertaker,  and  Furniture  Store,  33
Whitaker  St.    Zerubbabel,  15.
Mouthon,  William  J.  L.,  Lumber  Merchant.     Clinton,  54.
Newton,  John,  Blacksmith.     Clinton,  54.
O'Brien,  Augustus.     Clinton,  54.
Park,  W.  S.,  M.D.,  Botanic  Physician.     Clinton,  54.
Parker,  William  Foster,  General  Auction  and  Commission  Merchant,  85  Bay
St.     W.  M.,  Clinton,  54;  M.  3d  Veil,  Georgia  chap  ,  3;  Georgia  coun.,  2.
Peterson,  J.  B.,  Chief  Engineer  Steamship  Star  of  the  South.     Clinton,  54.
Rockwell,  Wm.  S.  Ancient  Landmark,  231 ;  P.  M.,  Benevolent,  3;  P.  H.  P.,
Temple  chap.,  6 ;  T.  HI.,  Georgia  Council,  5 ;  G.  M.  of  Grand  Lodge;  G.  K.  of
Grand  Chapter;  G.  T.  111.  H.  K. T.  Grand  Council;  P.  G.  C,  St.  Omer's  Com-
mandery, 2;  D.  G.  M.,  Grand  Commandery;  G.  M.  of  Supreme  Council  33d,
Southern  Jurisdiction,  U.  S.
Schley,  Philip  T,  Counselor  at  Law.  P.  G.  M. ;  P.  M.  Columbian,  7 ;  G.
H.  P.  G.  chap.;  P.  H.  P.  Darley  chap.,  7 ;  G.  Thrice  111.  G.  Master  G.  Coun.;
P.  Thrice  111.  G.  Master,  Hope  coun.,  4;  St.  Omer's  encpt.,  2.
Sichel,  Joseph,  Cigars  and  Tobacco.     Zerubbabel,  15.

--- Sayfa 141 ---
GEORGIA.  129
Sims,  F.  W.,  Publisher.    St.  Omer's  com.,  2,  Macon.
Stiefvater,  A.,  Merchant  Tailor,  Bruin  St.     Zerubbabel,  15.
Studor,  Victor,  Tailor.    Clinton,  54.
Tebeau,  L.,  Dealer  in  Boots  and  Shoes,  etc.,  123  Congress  St.    Clinton,  54.
Tyson,  J.  S.     S.  D.  Clinton,  54.
Wells,  James  T.,  Merchant.    Clinton,  54.
Bradt,  Morris,  Dealer  in  Gents'  Furnishing  Goods,  Macon.  Fort  Valley,  10  ;
Washington  coun.,  6.
Brinson,  Newton  P.,  Merchant,  Albany.     Albany  chap.,  15.
Brooks,  Stephen  S.,  Patten-maker,  Columbus.  Tyler,  Oglethorpe,  47;  S.
Darley  chap.,  7  ;  S.  Hope  coun.,  4 ;  St.  Aldemar  com.,  3.
Hubert,  Benj.  F.,  Merchant  and  Planter,  Thomasville.  P.  M.,  P.  H.  P.,
Wm.  J.  Johnson  chap.,  45  ;  St.  Omer's  encpt.  2.
Ingram,  W.  G.,  Farmer,  Palmyra.     Irving,  158.
Jackson,  Joseph,  Clothier,  Talbotton.  Sec'y  Olive,  10;  Sec'y  Clinton  chap.,  8.
Laurence,  J.  T.,  Practicing  Physician,  Postmaster,  Woodbury.  Woodbury,  149.
.  Lawrence,  Samuel,  Editor  of  Masonic  Signet  and  Journal,  Marietta.  P.  D.  G.
Master  3d  Masonic  District,  Grand  Lodge  of  Georgia.  P.  H.  P.,  Cherokee
chap.,  13.
Palmer,  John  T.,  Lumkin.  P.  M.,  Cross,  12  ;  P.  H.  P.,  L.  Dwelle  chap.,
17  ;  T.  111.  Palmer  coun.,  9  ;  Palestine  encpt.,  N.  Y.;  P.  Grand  Lecturer,  1st
Masonic  District.
Pemberton,  J.  S.,  Operative  and  Dispensing  Pharmaceutist,  Columbus.  Co-
lumbian, 7.
Perrine,  William  H.,  Carpenter  and  Builder,  Columbus.   S.  D.  Oglethorpe,  47.
Remington,  Francis  H.,  Merchant,  Thomasville.  P.  M.  St.  Thomas,  49  ;
King,  Thomasville  chap.,  44 ;  St.  Omer's  com.,  2.
Thompson,  Francis  M.,  Carpenter,  Albany.  Albany,  24 ;  P.  H.  P.,  Albany
chap.,  15  ;  K.  and  S.  M.
MASONRY  AMONG  THE  ARABS.
At  the  celebration  of  the  Anniversary  of  St.  John  the  Evangelist,  in  1843,  at
Oxford,  in  England,  Mr.  Blake,  the  Worshipful  Master  of  the  University  Lodge,
related  the  following  anecdote  of  the  influence  of  Masonry  among  the  Arabs.
"  He  confessed,"  he  said,  "  that  he  had  formerly  been  prejudiced  against  Free-
masonry, but  experience  abroad  had  convinced  him  of  his  error,  and  satisfied
him  that  there  was  something  in  it  beyond  the  mere  name.  He  once  had  a
friend,  who,  with  his  crew,  had  been  wrecked  in  the  Persian  Gulf,  when  an  Arab
chieftain  came  down  to  plunder  them,  but,  on  his  friend  giving  the  Masonic
signs,  they  were  protected  and  taken  to  Muscat,  where  they  were  not  only
clothed  and  properly  taken  care  of,  but  afterwards  taken  to  Borneo.  He
knew  this  to  be  a  fact ;  he  had  it  from  the  lips  of  his  friend  who  had  been
wrecked;  and  it  so  satisfied  him  as  to  the  merits  of  Masonry,  that  he  resolved
to  embrace  the  first  opportunity  of  enrolling  himself  among  its  members.  That
pledge  he  had  resumed ;  and  from  the  moment  he  had  been  initiated,  he  had  felt
the  deepest  interest  in  the  institution,  and  the  greatest  desire  to  promote  its
interests  and  extend  its  benefits."

--- Sayfa 142 ---
ILLINOIS.
GRAND  LODGE.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  Illinois  was  organized  April  6th,  5840.  Its  Annual
Communications  are  held  in  the  City  of  Springfield,  on  the  first  Tuesday  of
October.  It  is  composed  of  the  Grand  Officers,  elected  Past  Grand  Officers,
Past  Masters,  and  Masters  and  "Wardens  of  the  subordinate  Lodges.  The
revenue  of  the  Grand  Lodge  is  derived,  as  follows : —
For  Dispensations  for  new  Lodges  ....    $50  00
For  every  Charter,  in  addition    7  00
For  each  Master  Mason
   75
For  Dispensations  for  Degrees    5  00
For  special  Dispensations
2  00
For  Diplomas    2  00
There  are  306  Chartered  Lodges  and  33  under  dispensation  in  Illinois.    The
returns  at  the  Annual  Communication,  in  October,  5860,  of  290  Chartered
Lodges,  give  a  total  membership,  11,712,  and  those  under  dispensation,  441,
making,  altogether,  12,153.    Number  of  non-affiliated  Masons  returned,  589.
Sixteen  Chartered  Lodges  made  no  returns.    The  Lodges  under  Dispensation
initiated  during  the  year,  194;  Passed,  157;  and  Raised,  132.     Dues  paid  by
Chartered  Lodges,  $7571  25.     Fees  and  dues  by  Lodges  U.  D.,  $2093.
The  officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  for  the  present  Masonic  year  are : —
Ira  A.  W.  Buck,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
F.  M.  Blair,  R.  W.  Dep.  Grand  Master.
A.  J.  Kuteendall,  E.  W.  Senior  Grand  "Warden.
Silas  C.  Toler,  R.  W.  Junior  Grand  Warden.
William  McMurtrt,  R.  W.  Grand  Treasurer.
Harman  G.  Reynolds,  R.  W.  Grand  Secretary.
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.  '
No.       Lodge.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
1  Bodley,
Quincy.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
H.  Dills.
2  Equality,
Equality.
1st  Saturday.
J.  E.  Gibson.
3  Harmony,
Jacksonville.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
E.  Scott.
4  Springfield,
Springfield.
Monday  bef.  f.  moon .  William  Lavely
7  Friendship,
Dixon.
Thus,  on  or  bef.  f.  m. J.  A.  Hawley.
8  Macon,
Decatur,
Saturday  bef.  f.  m.
S.  F.  Greer.
9  Rushville,
Rushville.
Tu.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
J.  L.  Anderson.
13  St.  John's,
Peru.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays. ,  Wm.  Paul.
14  Warren,
Shawneetown.
Sat.  on  or  aft.  f.  m.
J.  S.  Rearden.
(130)

--- Sayfa 143 ---
ILLINOIS.
131
NO.  IiODQE.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
15  Peoria,
16  Temperance,
17  Macomb,
18  Lafayette,
19  Clinton,
20  Hancock,
23  Cass,
24  Saint  Clair,
25  Franklin,
26  Hiram,
27  Piasa,
28  Monroe,
29  Pekin,
30  Morning  Star,
31  Mount  Vernon,
33  Oriental,
34  Barry,
35  Charleston,
36  Kavenagh,
37  Monmouth,
38  Olive  Branch,
39  Herman,
40  Occidental,
42  Mount  Joliet,
43  Bloomington,
44  Hardin,
45  Griggsville,
46  Temple,
47  Caledonia,
48  Unity,
49  Cambridge,
50  Carolton,
51  Mount  Moriah,
52  Benevolent,
53  Jackson,
54  Reclamation,
55  Washington,
56  Pittsfield,
57  Trio,
58  Fraternal,
59  New  Boston,
60  Belvidere,
61  Lacon,
63  St.  Mark's,
64  Benton,
65  Euclid,
66  Knoxville,
67  Acacia,
68  Naples,
Peoria.
Vandalia.
Macomb.
Chicago.
Petersburg.
Carthage.
Beardstown.
Belleville.
Upper  Alton.
Henderson.
Alton.
Waterloo.
Pekin.
Canton.
Mount  Vernon.
Chicago.
Barry.
Charleston.
Elizabeth.
Monmouth.
Danville.
Quincy.
Ottawa.
Joliet.
Bloomington.
Mount  Sterling.
Griggsville.
Peoria.
N.  Caledonia.
St.  Charles.
Cambridge.
Carolton.
Hillsboro".
Meredosia.
Shelbyville.
Nauvoo.
Nashville.
Pittsfield.
Bock  Island.
Monticello.
New  Boston.
Belvidere.
Lacon.
Woodstock.
Benton.
Naperville.
Knoxville.
Lasalle.
Naples.
Mon.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Monday  aft.  f.  m.
1st  Friday.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Sat.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Monday  bef.  f.  m.
'1st  &  3d  Mondays.
1st  Monday.
Sat.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Thurs.  on  or  bef.  f.  m,
Tu.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Tu.  on  or  after  f.  m.
1st  Monday.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tu.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
2d  Thursday.
1st  &  3d  Monday.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
Fri.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Tu.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Last  Wednesday.
Th.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Tuesday  bef.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Th.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Th.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Th.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Tuesday  after  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
2d  Monday.
Tu.  on  bf.  or  af.  f.m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tu.  bef.  &  aft.  f.  m.
Every  Saturday.
Wed.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  aft.  f.  m.
S.  Tart.
J.  B.  Kyle.
A.  W.  Hitchcock.
John  Bennett.
John  Carlin.
J.  N.  Byan.
William  McMurtry.
S.  P.  Caldwell.
J.  T.  Slack.
W.  S.  Morgan.
B.  F.  Patrick.
James  Hill.
Newton  Low.
J.  S.  Whitesides.
G.  W.  Turnham.
George  Broad.
J.  J.  Moulding.
J.  W.  English.
William  Spurgin.
Charles  Marquis.
S.  A.  Hurlbut.
C.  F.  Thompson.
L.  Church.
Sylvester  Stevens.

--- Sayfa 144 ---
132
world's  masonic  register.
LODOE.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
70  Social,
71  Central,
72  Chester,
73  Batavia,
74  Rockton,
75  Roscoe,
76  Mount  Nebo,
77  Prairie,
78  Union,
79  Scott,
80  Whitehall,
81  Vitruvious,
82  Metamora,
84  De  Witt,
85  Mitchell,
86  Kaskaskia,
87  Mt.  Pulaski,
88  Havana,
89  Fellowship,
90  JerusalemTemp
91  Metropolis,
92  Stewart,
93  Toulon,
94  Morning  Sun,
95  Perry,
96  Saml.  H.  Davis,
97  Excelsior,
98  Taylor,
99  Edwardsville,
100  Astoria,
101  Madison,
102  Rockford,
103  Magnolia,
104  Lewistown,
105  Winchester,
106  Lancaster,
107  Fayette,
108  Versailles,
109  Sharon,
110  Lebanon,
111  Jonesboro',
112  Bureau,
113  Robert  Burns,
114  Marcelline,
115  Rising  Sun,
116  Vermont,
117  Elgin,
118  Waverly,
119  Henry,
Hennepin.
Springfield.
Chester.
Batavia.
Rockton.
Roscoe.
Carlinville.
Paris.
Waukegan.
Carlisle.
Whitehall.
Wheeling,
Metamora.
Clinton.
Pinckneyville.
Kaskaskia.
Mount  Pulaski.
Havana.
Marion.
Aurora.
Metropolis.
Geneseo.
Toulon.
Jerseyville.
Perry.
Mount  Morris.
Freeport.
Washington,
Edwardsville.
Astoria.
tipper  Alton.
Rockford.
Magnolia.
Lewistown.
Winchester.
Timber.
Fayette.
Versailles.
Trenton.
Lebanon.
Jonesboro'.
Princeton.
Keithsburg.
Marcelline.
Fort  Hill.
Vermont.
Elgin.
Waverly.
Henry.
Charles  Fisher.
2d  &  4th  Weds.
2d  Monday.
Sat.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Weds.
Tu.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Tu.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.  H.  Tanner.
C.  A.  Montgomery.
Miles  Bevel.
E.  M.  Husted.
F.  Edwards.
W.  H.  Taylor.
John  Bigger.
J.  F.  Coppell.
Wm.  B.  Allen.
Thos.  Moore.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
2d  Monday.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Monday  before  f.  m.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  af.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m,
1st  Monday.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Mon.  on  or  af.  f.  m
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tuesday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.      A.  S.  Whittaker.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.  H.  J.  Little.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.    M.  D.  Chamberlain.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Monday  before  f.  m.  H.  C.  Smith.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.  J.  M.  Cowen.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.      J.  K.  Sweet.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  af.  f.  m.    A.  J.  Stoner.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.        G.  W.  Seaman.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.     J.  D.  Tower.
Sat.  after  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.  C.  S.  Smith.
Fri.  b.  &  af.  f.  m.       J.  W.  Caldwell.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.    Wm.  B.  Smith.

--- Sayfa 145 ---
ILLINOIS.
133
Time  of  Meeting).
122  Mound,
123  Oquawka,
124  Cedar,
125  Greenup,
126  Empire,
127  Antioch,
128  Raleigh,
129  Greenfield,
130  Marion,
131  Golconda,
132  Mackinaw,
133  Marshall,
134  Sycamore,
135  Lima,
136  Hutsonville,
137  Polk,
138  Marengo,
139  Geneva,  •
140  Olney,
141  Garden  City,
142  Ames,
143  Kichmond,
144  De  Kalb,
145  A.  W.  Rawson,
146  Lee  Centre,
147  Clayton,
148  Bloomfield,
149  Ewington,
150  Vienna,
151  Bunker  Hill,
152  Fidelity,
153  Clay,
154  Russell,
155  Alpha,
156  Delavan,
157  Urbana,
158  McHenry,
159  Weathersfield,
161  Virden,
162  Hope,
163  Westfield,
164  Edw.  Dobbins,
165  Atlanta,
166  Star  in  the  East,
168  Milford,
169  Nunda,
170  Evergreen,
171  Girard,
172  Wayne,
Taylorville.
Oquawka.
Morris.
Greenup.
Pekin.
Antioch.
Raleigh.
Greenfield.
Salem.
Golconda.
Mackinaw.
Marshall.
Sycamore.
Lima.
Hutsonville.
McLeansboro'.
Marengo.
Geneva.
Olney.
Chicago.
Sheffield.
Richmond.
De  Kalb.
Pecatonica.
Lee  Centre.
Clayton.
Bloomfield.
Ewington.
Vienna.
Bunker  Hill.
Fidelity.
Ashley.
Georgetown.
Galesburg.
Delavan.
TJrbana.
McHenry.
Kewanee.
Virden.
Sparta
Westfield.
Lawrenceville.
Atlanta.
Rockford.
Milford.
Merona.
Freeport.
Girard.
Waynesville.
Tuesday  before  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Every  alter.  Wed.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.J
1st  &  3d  Thurs.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Weds.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
-Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
Mon.  on  b.  &  a.  f.  m.
Friday  before  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  ni.
Tues^  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Every  Friday.
Wed.  onb.  &af.  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
Sat.  on  b.  &  a.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
Th.  on  b.  &  a.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
Monday  before  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  b.  &  a.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  b.  &  a.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
D.  D.  Shumway.
P.  A.  Armstrong.
J.  B.  Carter.
J.  M.  Morrow.
James  McCabe.
A.  E.  Frear.
J.  S.  Morgan.
Alonzo  Ransom.
A.  S.  Vandyke.
RufusV.  Viele.
John  Kendrick.
Thos.  Wynn.
C.  B.  Kitchell.
H.  E.  Walton.
J.  J.  Vandyke.
A.  S.  Converse.
H.  T.  West.
A.  L.  Virden.
Chas.  Downey.
J.  A.  Church.
E.  F.  W.  Ellis.
L.  W.  Fletcher.
Fountain  Jones.

--- Sayfa 146 ---
134
world's  masonic  register.
No.          Lodoe.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
173  Cherry  Valley, Cherry  Valley.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
174  Lena,
Lena.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
175  Matteson,
Joliet.
Tues.  on  or  af.  f.  m. Edmund  Wilcox.
176  Mendota,
Mendota.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
177  Staunton,
Staunton.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
178  Illinois  Central ,  Amboy.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
179  Wabash,
Paradise.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
180  Moweaqua,
Moweaqua.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
E.  J.  Bice.
181  Moultrie,
Sullivan.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
182  Germania,
Chicago.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays .  H.  M.  Peters.
183  Meridian,
Earlville.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
185  Abingdon,
Abingdon.
Tu.  on  b.  &  af.  f.  m.
186  Fort  Armstrong,  Rock  Island.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
J.  S.  Gillmore.
187  Mystic  Tie,
Polo.
Every  Wednesday.
Jas.  C.  Luckey.
188  Cyrus,
Mount  Carroll.
Tu.  on  b.  &  af.  f.  m.
189  Fulton  City,
Fulton  City.
Monday  on  or  b.  f.  m ,  C.  A.  Chase.
190  Dundee,
Dundee.
lst&  3dFridays.#
191  Xenia,
Xenia.
Monday  on  or  b.  f.  m, .  James  Boy.
192  Farmington,
Farmington.
Sat.  bef.  &  af.  f.  m.
M.  B.  Mason.
193  Herrick,
Pontoosuc.
Monday  on  or  b.  f.  m, S.  Hatch.
194  Freedom,
Harding.
Sat.  on  or  af.  f.  m.
S.  J.  Chapman.
195  La  Harpe,
La  Harpe.
Saturday  bef.  f.  m.
196  Louisville,
Louisville.
Wednesday  af.  f.  m.
197  King  Solomon'i ;, Katie.
Wed.  on  b.  &  af.  f.  m
198  Grandview,
Grandview.
Tu.  on  or  bef.  f.  m. Dennis  Hearn.
199  Homer,
Homer.
Tu.  on  or  bef.  f.  m. W.  A.  Conkey.
200  Sheba,
Grayville.
2d&4thWednesd'ys
201  Centralia,
Centralia.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
202  Sterling,
Sterling.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
203  Lavely,
Williamsville.
Sat.  on  bef.  &  af.  f.  m
204  Flora,
Flora.
Wed.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
205  Corinthian,
East  Paw  Paw.
Th.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
J.  C.  Lamoine.
206  Fairfield,
Fairfield.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays. L.  D.  Bennett.
207  Tamaroa,
Tamaroa.
Fri  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
E.  W.  Payne.
208  Wilmington,
Wilmington.
Wed.  on  b.  &  af.  f.  m .  G.  A.  Gray.
209  Wm.  B.  Warren ,  Chicago.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays. Chas.  Tunnicliff.
210  Lincoln,
Lincoln.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays. J.  F.  Benner.
211  Cleveland,
Chicago.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays. W.  M.  Egan.
212  Shipman,
Shipman.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m. E.  B.  Vanhorn.
213  Ipava,
Ipava.
Wed.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
214  Gillespie,
Gillespie.
Fri.  on  or  bef.  f.  m. C.  F.  Beming.
216  Newton,
Jasper.
Sat.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
217  Mason,
Mason.
Wed.  on  or  bef.  f.  m. James  Claypool.
218  New  Salem,
New  Salem.
Wed.  on  or  bef.  f.  m. John  Preble.
219  Oakland,
Oakland.
Fri.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
220  Mahomet,
Middletown.
Mon.  on  or  bef.  f.  m,
221  Leroy,
Leroy.
Tu.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
222  G.  Washington, Chillicothe.
Mon.  on  b.  &  af.  f.  m.
223  Keeney,
Edginton.
Wednesday  bef.  f.  m. William  Fisher.

--- Sayfa 147 ---
ILLINOIS.
135
No.
Lodge.
Location.
Time  oe  Mjbetino.
Master.
224  Mount  Pleasant,  Santa  Anna.
225  Owisco,  Kankakee.
226  Pana,  Pana.
227  Columbus,  Columbus.
228  Lovington,  Lovington.
229  Manchester,  Manchester.
231  Wyanett,*  Wyanett.
232  Farmers,  Pelonia.
233  Blandinville,  Blandinville.
234  Duquoin,  Duquoin.
235  Dallas  City,  Dallas  City.
236  Charter  Oak,  Litchfield.
237  Cairo,  Cairo.
238  Black  Hawk,  Hamilton.
239  Mount  Carmel,  Mount  Carmel.
240  Western  Star,  West  Urbana.
241  Shekinah,  Ca/bondale.
243  Galva,  Galva.
244  Horicon,  Lane.
245  Greenville,  Greenville.
246  Panola,  Panola.
247  Robert  Morris,  Minonk.
248  Golden  Gate,  Prairie  City.
249  Hibbard,  Brighton.
250  Robinson,  Robinson.
251  Heyworth,  Heyworth.
252  Aledo,  Aledo.
253  Avon  Harmony,  Avon.
254  Aurora,  Aurora.
255  Donaldson,  Bear  Creek.
256  Algonquin,  Algonquin.
257  Warsaw,  Warsaw.
258  Bonus,  Bonus.
259  New  Berlin,  Carter.
260  Mattoon,  Mattoon.
261  Amon,  Amon.
262  Channahon,  Channahon.
263  Illinois,  Peoria.
264  Franklin  Grove,  Franklin  Grove.
265  Vermilion,  Dallas.
266  Kingston,  Kingston.
267  La  Prairie,  La  Prairie.
268  Paris,  Paris.
269  Wheaton,  Wheaton.
270  Levi  LuBk,  Arlington.
271,  Blaney,  Chicago.
272  Carmi,  Carmi.
273  Miners,  Galena.
274  Byron,  Byron.
Wed.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  b.  &  af.  f.  m.
Th.  on  b.  &  af.  f.  m.  S.  Dickey.
Mon.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.  A.  B.  McNeal.
Th.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Tu.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
Sat.  on  b.  &  aft.  f.  m.  J.  W.  Golitely.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Th.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.  B.  F.  Newlon.
Wed.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
1st  Tuesday.
Tu.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Tu.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.     N.  C.  Beasley.
Sat.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.    W.  S.  Post.
Sat.  on  b.  &  af.  f.  m.  R.  B.  Carson.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Wed.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Th.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.   Jacob  C.  Myer.
Wed.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.  Jacob  McChesney.
1st  Tuesday.
Mon.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Th.  on  or  b.  n.  &  f.  m.  J.  T.  Cox.
Th.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Tu.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
2d&4thWednesd'ys.
Tu.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.    William  Gordon.
Wed.  on  b.  &  af.  f.  m.  S.  A.  French.
Sat.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.   Peter  Baker.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
Sat.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
lst&3dWednesd'ys.  A.  M.  True.
Tu.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.    J.  B.  Schermerhorn.
1st  Tuesday.
Sat.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.  M.  M.  Bedford.
1st  &  3d  Sat.  af.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.  C.  M.  Kearn.
Th.  on  or  aft.  f.  m.     J.  Curl.
Wed.  bef.  &  af.  f.  m.  L.  J.  Bliss.
Wed.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
2d&4thWednesd'ys.
Tu.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.    T.  W.  Hay.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.    E.  S.  Parker.
Th.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.   J.  S.  Kosier.

--- Sayfa 148 ---
136
world's  masonic  register.
No.         Lodge.
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
Master.
275  Milton,
Milton.
Tu.  on  on  bef.  f.  m.
276  Elizabeth,
Elizabethtown.
1st  Monday.
J.  K.  Shipp.
277  Accordia,
Chicago.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
278  Joe  Daviess,
Warren.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
279  Neoga,
Neoga.
Th.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
280  Kansas,
Kansas.
Wed.  on  or  bef.  f.  m
281  Martinsville,
Martinsville.
Sat.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
282  Brooklyn,
Melugin's  Grove.
Wed.  on  or  bef.  f.  m
283  Meteor,
Sandwich.
Fri.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
284  Alton,
Alton.
2d  Thursday.
285  Catlin,
Catlin.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
286  Plymouth,
Plymouth.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
287  De  Soto,
De  Soto.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
D.  Gilbert.
288  Genoa.
Genoa.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
T.  Carr.
289  Iroquois,
Middleport.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays. M.  V.  B.  Harwood.
■290  Cache,
Mound  City.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
O.  Wilson.
291  Wataga,
Wataga.
lst&3dWednesd'ys .  S.  C.  Dean.
292  Chenoa,
Chenoa.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
293  Prophetstown,
Prophetstown.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays..
294  Pontiac,
Pontiac.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
295  Dills,
Breckinridge.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
H.  C.  Moss.
296  Quincy,
Quincy.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
297  Benjamin,
Camp  Point.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
J.  A.  Roih.
298  Wauconda,
Wauconda.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m. S.  Dewey.
299  Mechanicsburg,  Mechanicsburg.
Friday  b.  f.  m.
300  Hanover,
Hanover.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
301  Ingersoll,
Courtland.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
302  Durand,
Durand.
1st  Thursday.
303  Eaven,
Oswego,
lst&3dWednesd'ys. J.  D.  Kennedy.
304  Cement,
Utica.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m. J.  B.  Peckham.
305  Morse,
Onargo.
Tues.  on  b.  &  aft.  f.  m
306  Wm.  C.  Hobbs, Eureka.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
307  T.  J.  Picket,
Bushnell.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
J.  H.  Smith.
308  Ashlar,
Chicago.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
309  Harvard,
Harvard.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
T.  B.  Wakeman.
310  Dearborn,
Chicago.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
E.  W.  Jones.
311  Kilwinning,
Chicago.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
312  Ionic,
Decatur.
.George  Goodman.
313  York,
York.
Tu.  on  or  b.  n.  &  f.  m.
314  Palatine,
Palatine.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
P.  C.  Lusk.
315  Erwin,
Alton.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
316  A.  Jonas,
Oakalla.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays. R.  D.  Foster.
317  New  Liberty,
New  Liberty.
Sat.  on  or  aft.  f.  m.
318  J.  L.  Anderson ,  Augusta.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m. J.  C.  Bertholf.
319  Doric,
Moline.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
320  Malta,
Malta.
2d  &  4th  Thursdays.
321  Dunlap,
Morrison.
Mon.  onl).  or  a.  f.  m. Wm.  Lane.
322  Windsor,
Windsor.
Tu.  on  b.  or  a.  f.  m. C.  H.  Brunk.
323  Orient,
Lisbon.
Alternate  Mondays.

--- Sayfa 149 ---
ILLINOIS.
1ST
Time  of  Meeting.  Master.
2d  &  last  Tuesdays.
Saturday  after  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Wednesd'ys.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.   Wm.  Renwick.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
  Jacob  J.  Friend.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
  Jas.  Davis.
2d  Thursday.  0.  H.  Miner.
  Albert  Pothoff.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
  E.  W.  Roberts.
  Philip  J.  Wardner.
  0.  N.  Stafford.
  J.  L.  Beirne.
1st  Thursday.
  Wilson  Ong.
  Wm.  K.  Palmer.
  Abm.  Leonard.
  W.  A.  Smith.
  D.  H.  Morgan.
  Thos.  S.  Angier.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
  Aaron  Weider,
  David  Corwin.
  David  Wadsworth.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
  B.  F.  Thompson.
  Levi  Lapham.
  J.  E.  Church.
  Pike  M.  Frisbie.
  B.  A.  Heed.
324  Waukegan,
325  Harrisburg,
326  Chemung,
327  Industry,.
328  Grafton,
329  Durham,
330  Altona,
331  Mount  Erie,
332  Tuscola,
333  Tyrian,
334  Sumner,
335  Schiller,
Waukegan.
Harrisburg.
Chemung.
Industry.
Grafton.
Durham.
Altona.
Mount  Erie.
Tuscola.
Springfield.
Peoria.
336  New  Columbia,  New  Columbia.
337  Oneida,  Oneida.
338  Grand  De  Tour, Grand  De  Tour.
339  Saline,  Cedar  Bluffs.
340  Kedron,  Mount  Auburn.
341  Full  Moon,        Beirnville,
342  Summerville,
343  Arcturus,.         Polo.
344  Wenona,  Wenona.
345  Milledgeville,    Milledgeville.
346  N.  D.  Morse,     Concord.
347  Sidney,  Sidney.
348  Kussellville,      Russellville.
349  Sublette,  Sublette.
350  Fairview,  Fairview.
351  Tarbolton,         Fairburg.
352  Groveland,        Groveland.
353  Kinderhook,
354  Ark  &  Anchor,  Auburn.
355  Marine,
356  Hermitage,
357  Eddy,
U.  D.  Sumner,
U.  D.  Princeville,
U.  D.  Waubansia,
V.  D.  Orion,
V.  D.  Blackbury,
Marine.
Albion.
Kingston.
Princeville.
Chicago.
Union.
Blackbury.
GRAND    CHAPTER.
Organized  April  9th,  5850.
The  Grand  Chapter  holds  its  Annual  Convocation  at  the  place  of  and  three
days  before  the  Annual  Meeting  of  the  Grand  Lodge.  This  Grand  Chapter  is
subordinate  to  the  General  Grand  Chapter.  There  are  61  subordinate  Chapters
in  this  jurisdiction.  At  the  Annual  Convocation,  in  October,  5860,  there  were
54  Chapters  which  made  returns,  showing  a  total  of  membership  of  1851.    The

--- Sayfa 150 ---
138
WORLD'S  MASONIC   REGISTER.
number  of  members  of  Chapters  which  made  no  returns,  as  reported  at  the
previous  Convocation,  was  182,  making  a  total  of  2033.  The  number  of  Ex-
altations returned  was  226  ;  Admissions,  49  ;  Dimissions,  65 ;  Deaths,  14 ;  Sus-
pensions, 24 ;  Expulsions,  7.    Receipts  for  Dispensations,  fees,  and  dues,  $1154.
SUBORDINATE  CHAPTERS.
No.        Name.
1  Springfield,
2  Lafayette,
3  Jacksonville,
4  Horeb,
5  Quincy,
6  Shawneetown,
7  Peoria,
8  Alton,
9  Stapleton,
10  Union,
11
12  Mount  Zion,
13  Euclid,
14  Fox  River,
15  Franklin,
16  Herman,
17  Illinois,
18  Barrett,
19  Morse,
20  Lusk,
21  Macon,
22  Aurora,
23  Freeport,
24  Winnebago,
25  Pekin,
26  Bloomington,
27  Joliet,
28  Princeton,
29  Clarke,
30  Warren,
31  Orient,
32  Edgar,
33  Carthage,
34  McHenry,
35  Harmony,
36  Woodstock,
37  Shabbona,
38  Bichland,
39  Elwood,
40  Hutsonville,
41  Waukegan,
42  Lacon,
43  Washington,
Location.
Springfield.
Chicago.
Jacksonville.
Henderson.
Quincy.
Shawneetown.
Peoria.
Alton.
Bushville.
Pittsfield.
Meredosia.
Cambridge.
Naperville.
St.  Charles.
Upper  Alton.
Henry  and  Hennepin.
Keithsburg.
Bock  Island.
Macomb.
Vermont.
Decatur.
Aurora.
Freeport,
Rockford.
Pekin.
Bloomington.
Joliet.
Princeton.
Beardstown.
Monmouth.
Morris.
Paris.
Carthage.
McHenry.
Lawrenceville.
Woodstock.
Ottawa.
Olney.
Kankakee.
Hutsonville.
Waukegan.
Lacon.
Chicago.
Time  of  Meeting.
Monday  after  full  moon.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
1st  Saturday.
Last  Saturday.
Monday  of  f.  m.
1st  Thursday.
Friday  on  or  before  f.  m.
2d  Monday.
Monday  before  full  moon.
1st  Monday.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
Friday  on  or  bef.  full  moon.
2d  Thursday.
Wednesday  before  full  moon.
Tuesday  before  full  moon.
2d  Friday.
1st  &  3d  Wednesdays.
Wednesday  before  full  moon.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
1st  Tuesday.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
1st  Monday.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Thursday  on  or  bef.  f.  moon.
2d  Monday.
2d  Wednesday.
1st  Thursday.
Monday  on  or  before  f.  m.
.Wednesday  before  full  moon.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
1st  &  3d  Wednesdays.
1st  &  3d  Wednesdays.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Saturday  after  full  moon.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
Tuesday  before  full  moon.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.

--- Sayfa 151 ---
ILLINOIS.
139
No.
Name.
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
44
Duquoin,
Duquoin.
2d  Monday.
45
Egyptian,
Joneaboro'.
1st  Friday.
46
Galesburg,
Galesburg.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
47
Kewanee,
Kewanee.
1st  &  3d  Wednesdays.
48
Markwell,
Monticello.
Thursday  before  full  moon.*
49
Sycamore,
Sycamore.
2d  &  4th  Monday.
50
Urbana,
West  Urbana.
Thursday  on  or  before  f.  m.
51
Joe  Daviess,
Galena.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
52
De  Kalb,
De  Kalb.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
53
Burke,
Carlinville.
Friday  on  or  before  f.  m.
54
Keystone,
Charleston.
55
Blair,
Shelbyville.
Tuesday  after  full  moon.
56
Na-chu-sa,
Dixon.
1st  &  3d  Monday.
57
Sterling,
Sterling.
Wednesday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
58
Clement,
Utica.
Thursday  on  or  after  f.  m.
59
Goodbrake,
Clinton.
1st  Thursday.
60
Peru,
Peru,
2d  &  4th  Thursdays.
U.D .  H.  G.  Reynolds,
Danville.
GRAND    COUNCIL.
Organized  5853.
The  Annual  Convocation  of  the  Grand  Council  is  held  in  Springfield,  on  the
last  Thursday  in  September.  It  has  10  subordinate  Councils  under  its  jurisdic-
tion. At  the  Annual  Convocation,  in  5860,  five  subordinate  Councils  made
returns,  as  follows :  Number  of  Members,  174 ;  Promotions,  47 ;  Admitted,  2 ;
Died,  2  ;  Dimitted,  5.     Dues  paid,  $90  50.
SUBORDINATE COUNCILS.
No.       Name.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
1  Illinois,
2  Springfield,
Springfield.
3d  Monday  after  full  moon,
3  Alton,
Alton.
4  Chicago,
Chicago.
1st  Saturday.
5  Jacksonville,
6  Rushville,
7  Saint  Louis,
8  Orion,
Princeton.
Saturday  on  or  b.  f.  moon.
9  Young,
Paris.
Tuesday  before  full  moon.
10  Mattoon,
Mattoon.
GRAND    COMMANDERT.
Organized  October  27th,  1857.
The  Grand  Commandery  of  Illinois  holds  its  Annual  Conclave  on  the  fourth
Tuesday  in  October.    It  has  9  Commanderies  under  its  jurisdiction,  2  of  which
are  under  dispensation.    The  returns  of  8  of  the  subordinate  Commanderies,  in
October,  1859,  gave  a  total  of  310  members.
10

--- Sayfa 152 ---
HO
■world's  masonic  register.
SUBORDINATE   COMMANDERIES.
No.      Name.
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
1     Apollo,
Chicago.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
2    Belvidere,
Alton.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
3    Peoria,
Peoria.
1st  Friday.
4     Joliet,
Joliet.
1st  &  3d  Wednesdays.
5    Blaney,
Morris.
Last  Monday.
6    Elwood,
Springfield.
1st  Wednesday.
7     Freeport,
Freeport.
1st  &  3d  Wednesdays.
U.  D.  Galesburg,
Galesburg.
1st  Monday.
IT.  D.  Beaumanoir,
Decatur.
SUBSCEIBEES'  NAMES.
ASTOBIA.
Anderson,  C.  G.,  Tinsmith.     Astoria,  100.
Boyd,  John,  Merchant.     S.  W.,  Astoria,  100.
Cummings,  S.  P.,  Merchant.    Astoria,  100 ;  Stapleton  chap.,  9 ;  Bushville
coun.,  6.
Garing,  C.  M.,  Merchant.    Astoria,  100.
Gilliland,  John  A.,  Tanner.    Astoria,  100 ;  Lnsk  chap.,  20.
Hart,  Z.  E.,  Farmer.    Astoria,  100.
Hopkins,  G.  V.,  Physician  and  Farmer.     Astoria,  100;  Stapleton  chap.,  9.
Howell,  Nelson,  Carpenter.    Astoria,  100.
Kerns,  "William,  Merchant.     Astoria,  100.
Leak,  B.  ¥.,  Cooper.    Astoria,  100.
Montgomery1,  Rev.  ~FAi,  Methodist  Minister.     Astoria,  100  ;  Lusk  chap.,  20.
Ogle,  Jehu,  Parmer.    Astoria,  100.
Shrier,  David,  Tailor.     J.  D.,  Astoria,  100.
Smith,  James  H.,  Merchant.    Astoria,  100.
Smith,  P.  P.,  Merchant.    Astoria,  100.
Smith,  Samuel,  Gunsmith.     Astoria,  100.
Sparks,  James  C,  Merchant.     Astoria,  100.
Stambaugh,  Jacob  B.,  Farmer.     Astoria,  100.
Toler,  William  T.,  Physician.     Astoria,  100.
CHICAGO.
Alshuler,  Charles,  Merchant.    Terre  Haute,  19.
Barrell,  James,  Post  Office  Clerk.    Garden  City,  141.
Benscheid,  E.,  File  Cutter.     Garden  City,  141.
Haneman,  A.  C.  B.,  Book-keeper.     Garden  City,  141.
Nietschman,  B.,  Collector.    Germania,  182.
Oertel,  Albert  G.,  Exchange  and  Collection  Office.    Garden  City,  141.

--- Sayfa 153 ---
ILLINOIS.  141
Scriven  Charles  H.,  Advertising  Agent,  No  63  Dearborn  Street.  Wa-
bansia,  160.
Staring,  Henry,  Superintendent  Freight  Depot,  C.  B.  and  Q.  B.  B.  Garden
City,  141.
DE  KALB.
Burt,  Stephen  D.,  Painter.    S.  D.,  De  Kalb,  144.
Butts,  Jesse  D.,  Dealer  in  Lumber  and  Produce.    S.  W.,  De  Kalb,  144.
Coolege,  John,  Merchant.    De  Kalb,  144.
Earl,  "William  D.,  Blacksmith  and  Farmer.    De  Kalb,  144.
Fox,  Pliny  L.,  Lawyer.     De  Kalb,  144.
Gilbert,  Eli  B.,  Justice  of  Peace,  Joiner  and  Carpenter.    De  Kalb,  144.
Goodell,  John  M.,  Produce  Dealer.    Treasurer,  De  Kalb,  144.
Hopkins,  Franklin,  Produce  Dealer.     De  Kalb,  144.
Hyslop,  Stephen  E.,  Physician.    De  Kalb,  144.
Johnson,  U.  0.,  Lawyer.    "Warren,  240,  Pa.
Kendall,  Charles,  Grocer.    De  Kalb,  144.
Nichols,  Israel,  Dealer  in  Furnishing  Goods,  Lumber,  Produce,  etc.  De
Kalb,  144.
Pierce,  Bester,  Farmer.  De  Kalb,  144 ;  Eandolph  chap.,  5  ;  Eandolph  coun.,
E.  and  S.  Masters,  5,  Vt.
Stevens,  Horace  M.,  Produce  Dealer.     De  Kalb,  144.
"Wetmore,  Titus  C,  Justice  of  Peace  and  Law  Broker.  P.  M.,  De  Kalb,
144 ;  Apollo  chap.,  44,  N.  Y. ;  Apollo  encpt.,  15.
"Wright,  Francis  G.,  Physician.     De  Kalb,  144.
GILLESPIE.
Berning,  Charles  F.,  Blacksmith.    Gillespie,  214.
HOMEE.
Kelley,  J.  "W.,  Merchant.    Sec'y  Homer,  199.
Kirkley,  B.,  Merchant.     Clark,  101,  Ohio.
Thomas,  Jno.  B.,  Attorney  at  Law.    Homer,  199 ;  P.  S.,  Urbana,  chap.,  50.
3STAUTOO.
Cohn,  Morris,  Merchant.    Lima,  135.
Crenshaw,  Theophilus,  Blacksmith  and  Hotel-keeper.    Lima,  135.
Green,  "Wolf.    De  Kalb,  144.
Harsh,  Christian,  Tobacconist.    Eeclamation,  54.
Loheide,  Frederick  "Wilhelm,  Merchant.    ~W.  M.,  Eeclamation,  54.
Bitter,  Alexander,  Merchant.    Edwardsville,  99.
ODELL,  Livingston  Co.
Millard,  A.  W.,  Farmer.    Hiram,  261,  Pa.
SIDNEY.
Johnson,  Eobert.    Homer,  199.
Upp,  0.  W.,  Merchant.    Homer,  1 99.

--- Sayfa 154 ---
142  world's  masonic  register.
vandalia.
Martin,  "William.     Temperance,  16;  Macon  chap.,  21;  Chartered  member  of
Beaumanoir  com.,  9.
VEEMOTT.
Alexander,  "William,  "Wheelwright.     Vermont,  116.
Anderson,  Robert,  Tanner.    Vermont,  116  ;  Lusk  chap.,  20.
Arnold,  Joseph  M.,  Farmer.     Vermont,  116.
Bates,  David,  Carpenter.    Vermont,  116.
Branson,  Thomas  R.,  Clerk.    Vermont,  116 ;  Lusk  chap.,  20.
Carnahan,  Jesse,  Carpenter.     Vermont,  116  ;  Lusk  chap.,  20.
Cleavinger,  Dr.  Lorenzo  D.,  Physician.     Vermont,  116  ;  Lusk  chap.,  20.
Cox,  Caleb  B.,  Merchant.    Vermont,  116  ;  Lusk  chap.,  20.
Craig,  John  A.,  Parmer.     Vermont,  116 ;  Lusk,  chap.,  20.
Dilworth,  Robert,  Druggist.    Vermont,  116  ;  Lusk,  chap.,  20.
Driesbach,  Jones,  Farmer.    Vermont,  116 ;  Scribe,  Lusk  chap.,  20.
Durell,  William  M.,  Lumber  Merchant.     Vermont,  116  ;  Lusk  chap.,  20.
Frisbie,  Agur  G.,  Justice  of  Peace.    Vermont,  116  ;  Lusk  chap.,  20.
Gardner,  Ephraim  C,  Physician.    Vermont,  116.
Glore,  Christopher  C,  Brickmaker.    Vermont,  116  ;  Lusk  chap.,  20.
Harland,  John,  Farmer.    Vermont,  116  ;  Lusk  chap.,  20.
Hartford,  James,  Miller.    Vermont,  116.
Jacob,  Harrison  S.,  Chairmaker.    Vermont,  116 ;  Lusk  chap.,  20  ;  Rushville
coun.,  4 ;  R.  and  S.  Master.
Kirkbride,  Andrew  B.,  Miller.     Vermont,  116.
Kirkbride,  David,  Hotel-keeper.    Vermont,  116;  Lusk  chap.,  20.
Kirkbride,  Eleazer,  Miller.     Vermont,  116 ;  Lusk  chap.,  20.
Kelly,  James  W.,  Merchant.    Vermont,  116  ;  Lusk  chap.,  20.
Moore,  Edward  T.,  Carpenter.    Steward,  Vermont,  116.
Ross,  Harvey  L.,  Merchant.     Vermont,  116  ;  Lusk  chap.,  20.
Seaborn,  Johnston,  Farmer.    Vermont,  116 ;  Lusk  chap.,  20.
Sidwell,  Thomas  E.,  Clerk.    Vermont,  116  ;  Lusk  chap.,  20.
Stapleford,  Edward,  Merchant.    Vermont,  116  ;  Steward,  Lusk  chap.,  20.
Vail,  J.  C,  General  Book  Agent.     Vermont,  116.
"Wright,  William  B.,  Farmer.    Vermont,  116.
Keith,  Robert,  Keithsburg.  Robert  Burns,  113  ;  Dlinois  chap.,  17  ;  Illinois
coun.,  1 ;  Apollo  com.,  1.
Macalister,  Daniel,  Engineer  and  Machinist,  Galena.  Brearley,  2,  N.  J.;
Columbia  Mark,  91,  Pa.
Graham,  R.  H.,  Attorney  at  Law,  Editor  and  Publisher  Moline  Independent,
Moline.    Union,  45,  Lima,  N.  V.
Van  Dyke,  J.  J.,  Ashley  Station,  Illinois  Central  Railroad.
Keown,  Larkin  C,  Book-keeper,  Alhambra.    Franklin,  25.
Williams,  Thomas,  Carpenter,  Bloomington.    Bloomington,  43.
Price,  Franklin,  Mayor,  Land  Agent,  Notary  Public,  etc.,  Bloomington.
Bloomington,  43.

--- Sayfa 155 ---
ILLINOIS.  143
Nicholl,  "William,  Clerk,  Eockford.  Eockford,  102  ;  Winnebago  chap.,  24 ;
Washington  coun.,  1,  and  Jacques  De  Molay  com.,  2,  Washington,  Pa.
Anderson,  James  W.,  Harness-maker,  Canton.  Morning  Star,  20 ;  Lusk
chap.,  20.
George,  Charles,  Silversmith,  Mount  Joliet.  Mount  Joliet,  42 ;  Clark
chap.,  29.
Simpson,  J.  L.,  Lumber  and  Grain  Merchant,  Hennepin.  Social,  70 ;  Her-
man chap.,  16.
Kinney,  Thomas  J.,  Commission  and  Forwarding  Merchant,  Astoria,  As-
toria, 100.
Greenleaf,  George  H.,  Merchant,  Lacon.     Henry,  119;  Herman  chap.,  16.
Willitts,  Elias,  Attorney  at  Law,  Keithsburg.     Keithsburg,  59.
Bassett,  Isaac  N.,  Attorney  at  Law,  Keithsburg.     Keithsburg,  59.
Willitts  &  Bassett,  Attorneys  at  Law,  Keithsburg.     Keithsburg,  59.
Stevens,  Sylvester,  Blacksmith,  Knoxville.  Knoxville,  66  ;  Horeb  chap.,  4 ;
Illinois  coun.,  1.
McCracken,  James,  Farmer,  Knoxville.  Knoxville,  66 ;  Horeb  chap.,  4 ;
Illinois  coun.,  1.
Dosset,  James,  Farmer,  Knoxville.    Knoxville,  66  ;  Horeb  chap.,  4.
Wilcox,  Edward  S.,  Farmer,  Geneva.    Elgin,  117.
EXAMINE  YOURSELF,  BROTHER.
We  assume  that  Freemasonry  links  its  membership  in  the  golden  chain  of
fraternity — that  it  cements  friendships — that  it  elevates  its  disciples  morally  and
intellectually — that  it  restrains  the  passions — that  the  recipients  of  its  mysteries
become  better,  more  virtuous,  more  useful,  and  better  fitted  to  enjoy  the  com-
munion of  the  "just  made  perfect"  in  the  celestial  sphere ;  but  in  assuming  this,
let  each  member  of  the  craft  examine  himself  closely,  and  answer  the  questions,
if  since  his  admission  into  the  order  he  has  made  any  advancement  in  developing
the  spiritual  part  of  his  nature  ?  in  unfolding  the  internal  qualities  of  his  heart
and  mind  ?  if  he  has  become  a  better  man  than  he  was  before  ?  more  faithful  to
his  fellow-man  ?  more  true  to  himself  and  to  his  God  ?  It  is  vain  to  assume  that
Freemasonry  improves  and  elevates  those  who  are  initiated  into  its  mysteries,  if
the  effect  is  not  visible  in  the  life  and  conduct  of  its  disciples.  We  do  not
hesitate  to  assert  that  if  Freemasons  will  live  up  to  the  principles  of  Free-
masonry, that  they  will  become  better,  more  useful  and  more  virtuous  men.
Then  it  follows,  as  a  matter  of  course,  that  those  who  are  not  benefited  by  their
connection  with  the  fraternity,  who  have  not  improved  in  their  moral  nature,
who  have  made  no  progress  in  developing  the  internal  qualities  of  the  heart  and
mind,  have  not  gained  a  true  knowledge  of  Freemasonry.  Examine — examine
yourself,  Brother,  and  see  how  the  case  stands  with  you  ;  if  you  have  improved
by  your  connection  with  the  Masonic  Institution.

--- Sayfa 156 ---
INDIANA.
GRAND  LODGE.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  Indiana  was  organized  January  ]  2th,  5818.  Its  Annual
Communications  are  held  in  the  City  of  Indianapolis,  commencing  on  the  fourth
Monday  of  May.
Its  membership  consists  of  the  Grand  Officers,  Past  Grand  and  Deputy
Grand  Masters,  and  the  Masters  of  the  subordinate  Lodges.
The  revenue  of  the  Grand  Lodge  is  derived  as  follows : —
For  Charters  for  new  Lodges   $40  00
For  each  Initiation
1  00
For  each  member  (Grand  Lodge  dues)      ....  50
There  are  263  subordinate  Lodges  in  this  jurisdiction,  having  9727  affiliated
members.  The  returns  of  the  subordinate  Lodges  for  the  year  ending  Decem-
ber 31,  5859,  show  that  there  were  671  Initiations,  684  Passings,  678  Raisings,
247  Admissions,  82  Reinstations,  178  Rejections,  389  Dimissions,  83  Deaths,
232  Suspensions,  20  Expulsions.
The  receipts  of  the  Grand  Lodge  for  the  year  ending  May  26,  5860,  were
$6612  72  ;  and  the  disbursments,  $5350  76.
The  Grand  Officers  for  the  present  Masonic  year  are  as  follows : —
Alexander  C.  Downey,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
Mahlon  D.  M anson,  R.  W.  Deputy  Grand  Master.
William  N.  Doughty,  R.  W.  Senior  Grand  "Warden.
John  B.  Fravel,  R.  W.  Junior  Grand  Warden.
Charles  Fisher,  R.  W.  Grand  Treasurer.
Francis  King,  R.  W.  Grand  Secretary.
Rev.  William  Pelan,  Grand  Chaplain.
Daniel  K.  Hays,  Grand  Lecturer.
William  K.  Edwards,  Grand  Marshal.
Robert  D.  Brown,  Senior  Grand  Deacon.
William  W.  Clinedenst,  Junior  Grand  Deacon.
Henry  Colestock,  Grand  Tyler.
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.
«o.       Name.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
1  Vincennes,
Vincennes.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Albert  Hayward.
2  Union,
Madison.
1st  Tuesday.
David  Cope.
3  Carlisle,
Carlisle.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Jas.  K.  O' Haver.
4  Lawrenceburg, Lawrenceburg.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
John  C.  McQuisto'n,
5  Cambridge,
Cambridge.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thos.  Newby.
6  Eising  Sun,        Rising  Sun.
(144)
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.  Alexr.  C.  Downey.

--- Sayfa 157 ---
INDIANA.
145
LOOATION.
Time  op  Meeting.
Master.
7  Versailles,
8  Parke,
9  Boone,
10  Napoleon,
Versailles.
Rockville.
Lebanon.
Napoleon.
11  B'k'le  Harmony,Brookville
12  Goshen,  Goshen.
13  Washington,
14  Bedford,
15  Warren,
16  Golden  Rule,
17  Harrison,
18  Attica,
19  Terra  Haute,
20  St.  John's,
21  Salem,
22  Monroe,
23  Centre,
24  Webb,
25  Wayne,
26  Western  Star,
28  Shelby,
29  Laurel,
30  Charity,
31  Milan,
32  Tisgah,
33  Tipton,
34  Vermilion,
35  Marion,
36  Greensburg,
37  Perry,
38  Williamsport,
39  New  Albany,
40  Clark,
41  Laporte,
42  Hiram,
43  Springfield,
44  Madison,
45  St.  Joseph,
46  Delaware,
47  Temple,
48  Mt.  Olive,
49  Hagerstown,
50  Montgomery,
51  Aurora,
52  Westport,
53  Chesterfield,
54  Clinton,
55  Burns,
56  Winchester,
Brownstown.
Bedford.
Connersville.
Enightstown.
Harrison.
Attica.
Terra  Haute.
Columbus.
Salem.
Bloomington.
Indianapolis.
Richmond.
Fort  Wayne.
Danville.
Shelbyville.
Laurel.
Washington.
South  Milan.
Corydon.
Logansport.
Eugene.
Indianapolis.
Greensburg.
Lafayette.
Williamsport.
New  Albany.
Jeffersonville.
Laporte.
Centreville.
Mt.  Carmel.
Pendleton.
South  Bend.
Muncie.
Greencastle.
Delphi.
Hagerstown.
Crawfordsville.
Aurora.
Westport.
Chesterfield.
Frankfort.
Manchester.
Winchester.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Monday  b.  f.  m.
W.  of  or  after  f.  m.
Fri.  on  or  after  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
Friday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Every  other  Sat,
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Friday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Wednesday.
3d  Wednesday.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
Thur.  on  or  b.  f  m.
3d  Wednesday.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
Every  Monday.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
Mon.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
Th.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
On  or  before  f.  m.
Friday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Sat.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thur.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Jas.  Hardesty.
Hiram  Alvord.
Harvey  G.  Hazelrigg.
Joseph  E.  Lange.
Mathew  Hutchinson.
Robt.  D.  Jillson.
Ralph  Applewhite.
Henry  Davis.
Christian  Beck.
James  Brown.
Geo.  Bowlby.
L.  Arbogast.
R.  W.  Thompson.
John  D.  Mathes.
John  L.  Menaugh.
W.  C.  Tarkington.
Jas.  M.  Tomlinson.
S.  H.  Harrington.
Jas.  Johnson.
J.  K.  Moore.
Z.  B.  Waller.
W.  N.  Doughty.
Saml.  W.  Peck.
S.  W.  Burlingame.
Walter  Q.  Gresham.
Horace  Coleman.
John  R.  Scone.
J.  M.  Bramwell.
Daniel  Stewart.
John  Taylor.
Robt.  A.  Chandler.
Thomas  R.  Austin.
Archibald  Cameron.
John  B.  Fravel.
Eleazor  Malone.
J.  K.  Jameson.
S.  D.  Irish.
C.  A.  Stover.
William  Craig.
Samuel  Catherwood.
A.  H.  Bowen.
D.  W.  Mason.
Saml.  D.  Smith.
Thomas  Pattison.
L.  E.  Stott.
J.  F.  Williams.
Wm.  J.  Byers.
Gurshom  Dun.
John  B.  Routh.

--- Sayfa 158 ---
146
■world's  masonic  register.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
57  Noblesville,
58  Liberty,
59  Jennings,
60  Fountain,
61  Hanna,
62  Phoenix,
63  Pleasant  Hill,
64  Evansville,
65  Bellville,
66  Brookston,
67  Miami,
68  Friendship,
70  Brownsville,
71  Solomon,
72  Lewisville,
73  Warsaw,
74  Martinsville,
75  Bainbridge,
76  Meridian  Sun,
77  Mt.  Moriah,
78  Mooresville,
79  Fulton,
80  Hopewell,
81  Allensville,
82  Russiaville,
83  Michigan  City,
84  Bloomfield,
85  Clay,
86  Social,
87  Jay,
88  Deming,
90  Portland,
91  New  Castle,
92  Gosport,
93  Kokomo,
94  Milford,
95  Spencer,
96  Andersonville,
97  Albion,
98  Fairfield,
99  Jerusalem,
100  Edinburgh,
101  Hancock,
102  Economy,
103  Dayton,
104  Jefferson,
105  Grant,
106  Blackford,
107  Franklin,
Noblesville.
Liberty.
Vernon.
Covington.
Wabash.
Rushville.
Pleasant  Hill.
Evansville.
Bellville.
Brookston.
Peru.
Hart's  Mills.
Brownsville.
Hardinsburg.
Lewisville.
Warsaw.
Martinsville.
Bainbridge.
Lagrange.
Anderson.
Mooresville.
Rochester.
Dillshorough.
Allensville.
Russiaville.
Michigan  City.
Bloomfield.
Bowling  Green.
Terra  Haute.
Portland.
Manchester.
Portland  Mills.
New  Castle.
Gosport.
Kokomo.
Milton.
Spencer.
Andersonville.
Albion.
Fairfield.
Clinton.
Edinburgh.
Greenfield.
Economy.
Dayton.
New  Albany.
Marion.
Hartford  City.
Franklin.
Tu.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
Thur.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tuesdays.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Friday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Monday  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  in.
Thursdays.
1st  Saturday  b.  f.  in.
Friday  b.  f.  m.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Friday  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thur.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Monday  b.  f.  m.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thur.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
2d  &  4th  Thursdays.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
S.  C.  Elwell.
J.  F.  Gardner.
Jeremiah  Bundy.
Elias  C.  Wilcox.
Ed.  S.  Ross.
Leonidas  Sexton.
J.  B.  Ashenhurst.
Wm.  Hubbill.
W.  C.  Mitchell.
John  Medaris.
Henry  Boyce.
John  Snyder.
R.  B.  Perry.
C.  R.  Ellis.
Leonidas  Fox.
T.  Davenport.
Benjamin  Hayward.
John  Starr.
Andrew  Eminger.
William  Crim.
A.  W.  Reagan.
David  W.  Lyon.
Schuyler  Shutts.
Benj.  L.  Simmons.
W.  M.  Waters.
Wm.  Blinks.
E.  H.  C.  Cavin».
O.  H.  P.  Ash.
A.  L.  Chamberlin.
Thomas  Black.
Jocob  Harter.
H.  C.  Darnall.
James  J,  Hamilton.
James  Hutchings.
J.  C.  Linsday.
Joseph  H.  Hedrick.
Isaac  E.  Johnson.
Joseph  A.  Mitchell.
D.  P.  Coffinberry.
Z.  Ferguson.
Andrew  King.
A.  Clark.
E.  J.  Judkins.    '
R.  Thornburg.
P.  D.  Paige.
J.  A.  Hutton.
A.  W.  Sanford.
H.  C.  Baldwin.
J.  T.  Vawter.

--- Sayfa 159 ---
INDIANA.
147
No.
Lodge.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
108  Milton,
109  Jonesboro',
110  Mystic,
111  Burlington,
112  Ilockport,
113  Thorntown,
114  Unity,
115  Westfield,
116  Leatherwood,
117  Deerfield,
118  Clarksville,
119  Paoli,
120  Scott,
121  Pike,
122  Switzerland,
123  Lafayette,
124  Clarksburg,
125  Prairie,
126  MillersTille,
127  Annapolis,
128  Austin,
129  Shawwannee,
130  Mishawaka,
131  Larrabee,
132  Cloverdale,
133  Rome,
134  Pleasant,
135  Nashville,
136  Vesta,
137  Porter,
138  Dupont,
139  Milroy,
140  Oakland,
141  Russellville,
142  North  Salem,
143  Tuscan,
144  Alamo,
145  Bluffton,
146  Jackson,
147  Farmers,
148  Morning  Star,
149  Plymouth,
150  Hope,
151  Hartford,
152  Cannelton,
153  Orleans,
154  Libanus,
155  Applegate,
156  Metamora,
Milton.
Jonesboro'.
Huntington.
Burlington.
Ilockport.
Thorntown.
Perrysville.
Westfield.
Heltonville.
Deerfield.
Clarksville.
Paoli.
New  Frankfort.
Petersburgh.
Vevay.
Lafayette.
Clarksburg.
Bensselaer.
Millersville.
Annapolis.
Tipton.
Stringtown.
Mishawaka.
Stilesville.
Cloverdale.
Rome.
Acton.
Nashville.
Jefferson.
Valparaiso.
Dupont.
Milroy.
Oakland.
Russellville.
North  Salem.
Lagro.
Alamo.
Bluffton.
Seymour.
Norristown.
Davi's  Corner.
Plymouth.
Hope.
Hartford.
Cannelton.
Orleans.
Monticello.
Filmore.
Metamora.
Sat.  on  or  a.  f.  m.
Monday  before  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Thurs.  af.  n.  &  f.  m.
Saturdays.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Friday  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Every  Wed.  evening.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tuesday  before  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tuesday  before  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Monday  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Fri.  on  b.  &  a.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  a.  f.  m.
3d  &  1st  Sat.  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Tuesday  before  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tuesday  after  f.  m.
D.  I.  George.
J.  H.  Jones.
William  B.  Lyons.
Jno.  A.  Hazzard.
Oliver  Morgan.
Peter  Sandoe.
L.  C.  Garwood.
A.  V.  Talbert.
Dr.  H.  Malott.
John  Glee.
Samuel  Nickleson.
James  N.  Riley.
Samuel  Davis.
Thomas  Enight.
Chan.  Aldrich.
Thomas  A.  Carnahan.
W.  E.  Dobyns.
D.  T.  Halstead.
Samuel  Cory.
James  P.  Tucker.
J.  W.  Chambers.
R.  H.  Kerr.
B.  Byrkit.
E.  Hudson.
P.  Davis.
J.  J.  Lang.
William  R.  Ely.
J.  S.  Arwine.
Abm.  O.  Miller.
Jeremy  Hickson.
Wm.  D.  Houghton.
E.  H.  M.  Berry.
T.  P.  Hervey.
Adam  Hanna.
R.  Trowbridge.
Samuel  St.  John.
Matthew  H.  Bonnel.
Amos  Townsend.
A.  M.  Durand.
James  Moore.
B.  C.  Hicks.
Mark  Pomeroy\
D.  D.  F.  Larimore.
John  R.  Cole.
Paul  R.  Gest.
A.  F.  Allen.
Albert  Kingsberry.
W.  H.  Cook.
S.  B.  Tremble.

--- Sayfa 160 ---
148
world's  masonic  register.
No.           Lodge.
Location.
TlMI  OF  Meehko.
Master.
157  Lake,
Crown  Point.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m. Hiram  S.  Holton.
158  Wilmington,
Wilmington.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
R.  D.  Brown.
159  Whitewater,
Hillsboro'.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
T.  F.  Hamilton.
160  Lawrence,
Bryantsville.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Robert  L.  Rout.
161  Cedar,
Leesville.
Sat.  on  or  a.  f.  m.
Thomas  J.  Reed.
162  Bridgeport,
Bridgeport.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m. Joseph  H.  Ballard.
163  Mount  Vernon, Mount  Vernon.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
Marcus  S.  Blunt.
164  Ovid,
New  Columbus.
Tuesday  before  f.  m .  Hiram  Peden.
165  Allen,
Moore's  Hill.
Mon.  on  or  af.  f.  m. S.  H.  Enapp.
166  Newberry,
Newberry.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m. Nathan  Kimball.
167  New  Waah'gton,  New  Washington.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
T.  D.  Fouts.
168  Mt.  Pleasant,
Mount  Pleasant.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
Jas.  R.  Bryant.
169  Bridgeton,
Bridgeton.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
L.  B.  Denehie.
170  Summit  City,
Fort  Wayne.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f .  m.
E.  L.  Force.
171  Anthony,
Albany.
Tuesday  after  f.  m.
Isaiah  Sutton.
172  Lodiville,
Lodiville.
Thurs.  on  or  a.  f.  m .  D.  Dowdell.
173  Stanford,
Stanford.
Tuesday  before  f.  m .  I.  I.  Sullivan.
174  Newburg,
Newburg.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
F.  D.  Bullett.
175  Greensboro',
Greensboro'.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m. James  W.  Crowley.
176  Wooster,
Everton.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
William  Kerr.
177  Springville,
Springville.
Friday  before  f.  m.
P.  P.  Pearson.
178  Concordia,
Indianapolis.
2d  Wednesday.
George  F.  Meyer.
179  Reserve,
Sharpsville.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
G.  M.  Hawthorn.
180  Dublin,
Dublin.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m .  William  O.  Bogue.
181  Leesburg,
LeeBburg.
Wednesday.
Ed.  Moon.
182  Greenwood,
Greenwood.
1st  &  3d  Wednesd'ys .  R.  B.  Loomis.
183  Kane,
Elkhart.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
O.  H.  Main.
184  Herman,
Michigantown.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m .  J.  W.  Price.
185  Ligonier,
Ligonier.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m. John  C.  Richmond.
186  Darlington,
Darlington.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
John  Hiatt.
187  Ladoga,
Ladoga.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m .  B.  H.  Nicholson.
188  Posey,
Leavenworth.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
G.  W.  Lyon.
189  Columbia  City, Columbia  City.
Monday  before  f.  m .  D.  T.  Davies.
190  Oxford,
Oxford.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Elisha  Sargent.
191  Grandview,
Grandview.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays .  William  R.  Mead.
192  Westville,
Westville.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Edward  P.  Hurlbut.
193  Morristown,
Morristown.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
W.  W.  Woodyard.
194  Excelsior,
La  Porte.
1st  Wednesday.
Jos.  H.  Wilson.
195  Roanoke,
Roanoke.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
Caleb  Eldred.
196  Richmond,
Richmond.
1st  Tuesday.
Lewis  Burk.
197  Zion,
Zionsville.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f,  m. S.  A.  Lee.
198  Ripley,
Delaware  Station.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
Calvin  Huckins.
199  Cicero,
200  Hazelrigg,
Jamestown.
Rono.
.T    T?    Trnttpr.
201  Rono,
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.  Joseph  A.  Ballard.
202  Alton,
Alton.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays. L.  L.  Hazen.
203  Jerome,
204  Terre  Coupee,
Jerome.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Francis  Galway.
New  Carlisle.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays .  T.  S.  Borden.
205  Richland,
Newtown.
Monday  before  f.  m .  J.  J.  Schermerhorn.

--- Sayfa 161 ---
INDIANA.
149
Lodge.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
206  Livonia,  Livonia.
207  Fortville,  Fortville.
208  Monong,  Francisville.
209  Newport,  Newport.
210  North  Eastern,  Brockville.
211  Mount  Zion,  Camden.
212  Pennville,  Camden,  Jay  oo.
213  Moorefield,  Moorefield.
214  De  Kalb,  Auburn.
215  Lima,  Lima.
216  Bayless,  Waynesville.
117  Waldron,  Waldron.
218  Flat  Rock,  St.  Paul.
219  Butlerville,  Butlerville.
220  Advance,  Delphi.
221  Paris,  Paris.
222  Kingsbury,  Kingsbury.
223  Lynn,  Lynn.
224  Leo,  Hamilton.
225  Star,  Orland.
226  Blazing  Star,  Charlestown.
227  Warrington,  Warrington.
228  Mitchell,  Mitchell.
229  Whitney,  New  Burlington.
230  Quincy,  Quincy.
231  Prince,  Princeton.
232  Cornelius,  Abington.
233  Downey,  Boston.
234  Orange,  Fayettsville.
235  Alexandria,  Alexandria.
236  Angola,  Angola.
237  Martinsburg,  Martinsburg.
238  Taylorville,  Taylorville.
239  Forest,  Norristown.
240  Stranger's  Best,  Boonville.
241  Brownsburg,  Brownsburg.
242  Acacia,  Washington.
243  O'Brien,  Knox.
244  Galveston,  Galveston.
245  Ellettsville,  Ellettsville.
246  King,  Warren.
247  Perkinsville,  Perkinsville.
248  Olive  Branch,  Middletown.
249  Bedding,  Eeddington.
250  Bethel,  Bethel.
251  Keystone,  Allisonville.
252  Reynolds,  Reynolds.
254  Decatur,  Decatur.
255  New  Point,  New  Point.
Monday  before  f.  m.  Jos.  C.  Wible.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.      Samuel  Arnett.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.      Jacob  Byus.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.   James"  A.  Bell.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.    W.  H.  H.  Day.
lst&3dWednesd'ys.  James  M.  Justice.
Thur.  on  or  b.  f.  m.  A.  L.  Somers.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.    Perry  K.  Cotton.
TueB.  on  or  b.  f.  m.   Milton  F.  Pierce.
Saturdays.  D.  W.  Rupert.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.      Henry  Smith.
Sat.  on  or  af.  f.  m.     Peter  R.  Stroup.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.      A.  L.  Underwood.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.   L.  F.  Brougher.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.      B.  F.  Schermerhorn.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.      B.  F.  Russell.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.      Firman  Church.
1st  Sat.  af.  f.  m.        R.  W.  Hamilton.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.    E.  L.  Knight.
Thur.  on  or  b.  f.  m.  L.  C.  Marsh.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.   Andrew  J.  Hay.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.      J.  K.  King.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.     John  R.  Riley.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.      S.  V.  Jump.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.  Andrew  J.  Griffith.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.    J.  E.  Jenkins.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.   Jacob  Fender.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.        Nicholas  Druly.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.   Rice  W.  Robinson.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.      A.  G.  Tomlinson.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.    B.  F.  Dawson.
Sat.  on  or  af.  f.  m.     David  W.  Voyles.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.    Lewis  Roberts.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.      H.  S.  Madden.
2d  &  4th  Thursdays.  W.  L.  Barker.
Thur.  on  or  b.  f.  m.  J.  T.  Davison.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.      Rhodes  W.  Bunnel.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.       Jas.  O'Brien.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.      Alexander  Murphy.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.        Jas.  Campbell.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.   Daniel  Palmer.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.      G.  B.  Gmbb.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  in.      N.  M.  Grandstaff.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.       W.  C.  A.  Bain.
Saturday  af.  f.  m.      William  H.  Swain.
Sat.  on  or  af.  f.  m.    Isaac  N.  Craig.
Wed.  on  or  b.n.&f.m.  Robert  W.  Sill.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.    Nelson  P.  Doty.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.      David  G.  Pulse.

--- Sayfa 162 ---
150
WORLD'S   MASONIC  REGISTER.
No.       Lodge.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
256  Troy,
258  Hudson,
260  Winslow,
261  Monrovia.
262  Winnamac,
263  Sullivan,
264  Brazil,
265  Wheeling,
266  North  Liberty,
267  Xenia,
268  Miller,
269  Independence,
Troy.
Manhattan.
Winslow.
Monrovia.
Winnamac.
Sullivan.
Brazil.
Wheeling.
North  Liberty.
Xenia.
Clark's  Hill.
Independence.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  af.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  of  every  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  a.  f.  m.
K.  V.  Tong.
Samuel  Taylor.
William  E.  Chappie.
E.  P.  Stearns.
Jas.  W.  Selder.
Wm.  H.  Cornelius.
Jas.  M.  Oliver.
Jacob  C.  Polsley.
S.  Loring.
M.  D.  Frazer.
Calvin  C.  McDowell.
B.  H.  Hannah.
GRAND  CHAPTER.
The  Grand  Chapter  of  Indiana  was  organized  November,  5846.  This  Grand
Chapter  is  subordinate  to  the  General  Grand  Chapter.  Its  Annual  Convoca-
tions are  held  in  May.  It  will  hold  its  next  Annual  Convocation  at  Lafayette,
on  the  21st  of  May,  5861.  It  has  43  subordinate  Chapters  under  its  jurisdic-
tion. The  returns  of  the  subordinate  Chapters  show  the  following  work :  Ex-
altations, 120 ;  Eeinstations,  5  ;  Admissions,  18  ;  Rejections,  12  ;  Dimissions,
49  ;  Deaths,  15 ;  Suspensions  for  non-payment  of  Dues,  35 ;  Suspensions  for
other  causes,  2;  Expulsions,  4.  Total  number  of  members,  1534.  Total  re-
ceipts, $2095  40.
SUBORDINATE  CHAPTERS.
No.     Name.
1  Madison,
2  Logan,
3  Lafayette,
4  King  Solomon,
5  Indianapolis,
6  King  David,
7  Vincennes,
8  Greensburg,
9  Cambridge,
10  Columbus,
11  Terre  Haute,
12  Evansville,
13  Aurora,
14  La  Porte,
15  La  Porte,
16  Brookville,
17  New  Albany,
18  Maxwell,
19  Fort  Wayne,
20  Shelby,
21  Delphi,
Location.
Madison.
Logansport.
Lafayette.
Kichmond.
Indianapolis.
Bising  Sun.
Vincennes.
Greensburg.
Cambridge.
Columbus.
Terre  Haute.
Evansville.
Aurora.
La  Porte.
La  Porte.
Brookville.
New  Albany.
Connersville.
Fort  Wayne.
Shelbyville.
Delphi.
Time  of  Meeting.
2d  Thursday.
2d  Monday.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
2d  Friday.
1st  Friday.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
Tues.  on  or  a.  f.  m.
1st  Thur.  af.  f.  m.
3d  Tuesday.
Friday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Friday.
1st  Friday.
2d  Tuesday.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
2d  Monday.
Monday  af.  3d  Sat.
1st  Wednesday.
Thur.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tuesday  before  f.  m.
Date  op  Charteb.
Sept.  13,  5844.
Oct.  7,  5837.
Aug.  17,  5843.
May  25,  5846.
May  22,  5848.
May  26,  5849.
May  26,  5849.
May  26,  5849.
May  26,  5849.
May  26,  5849.
May  24,  5850.
May  20,  5852.
May  24,  5851.
May  24,  5851.
May  24,  5851.
May  24,  5851.
May  24,  5851.
May  24,  5851.

--- Sayfa 163 ---
INDIANA.
151
No.    Name.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Date  of  Charter.
23  Attica,
24  Rush,
25  Michigan  City,
26  Wabash,
27  Huntington,
28  Washington,
29  South  Bend,
30  Muncie,
31  Kokomo,
32  Milan,
33  Knightstown,
34  Bedford,
35  Randolph,
36  Lagrange,
37  Parke,
38  Salem,
39  Lebanon,
40  Crawfordsville,
41  Liberty,
42  Noble  County,
43  Edinburgh,
46  Danville,
Attica.
Rushville.
Michigan  City.
Wabash.
Huntington.
Washington.
South  Bend.
Muncie.
Kokomo.
Milan.
Knightstown.
Bedford.
Winchester.
Lagrange.
Rockville.
Salem.
Lebanon.
Crawforsdville.
Liberty.
Ligonier.
Edinburgh.
Danville.
2d  Tuesday.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Friday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Wednesday.
Monday  b.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
Friday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Monday.
2d  Friday.
Friday  after  f.  m.
3d  Tuesday.
Tuesday  after  f.  m.
2d  Wednesday.
Tuesday  after  f.  m.
2d  Monday.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
3d  Tuesday.
Monday  before  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
Friday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  af.  f.  m.
May  20,  5852.
May  18,  5854.
May  24,  5855.
May  24,  5855.
May  22,  5856.
May  26,  5856.
May  22,  5856.
May  22,  5856.
May  22,  5856.
May  22,  5856.
May  22,  5856.
May  22,  5856.
Mar.  19,  5856.
May  21,  5857.
May  21,  5857.
May  21,  5858.
May  20,  5858.
May  18,  5859.
May  17,  5859.
May  23,  5860.
May  23,  5860.
GRAND  COUNCIL  OF  ROYAL  AND  SELECT  MASTERS.
The  Grand  Council  of  Indiana  was  organized  in  5856.  Its  Annual  Commu-
nications are  held  at  Indianapolis  on  the  fourth  Monday  in  May.  It  has  12
subordinate  Councils  under  its  jurisdiction.  The  returns  for  the  year  ending
December  31st,  5859,  show  the  following:  Total  number  of  members,  386;
Advancements,  29;  Admissions,  4 ;  Dimissions,  7  ;  Deaths,  4;  Suspensions,
14 ;  Expulsions,  1 ;  Amount  of  dues,  etc.,  $235  50.
No.        Name.
1  Indiana,
2  Indianapolis,
3  Shelby,
4  Fort  Wayne,
5  Lafayette,
6  Fayette,
SUBORDINATE  COUNCILS.
Location.
New  Albany.
Indianapolis.
Shelbyville.
Fort  Wayne.
Lafayette.
Connersville.
No.  Name.
7  Aurora.
8  Terre  Haute,
9  Vincennes,
10  Wayne,
11  Logansport,
12  Crampton,
Location.
Aurora.
Terre  Haute.
Vincennes.
Richmond.
Logansport.
Attica.
GRAND  COMMANDERY.
Formed  May  16,  1854.
This  Grand  Commandery  is  subordinate  to  the  General  Grand  Encampment.
It  holds  its  Annual  Conclave  on  the  first  "Wednesday  of  December.    It  is  not

--- Sayfa 164 ---
152  world's  masonic  register.
permanently  located.     It  has  7  subordinates,  only  5  of  which  made  returns
in  December,  5859,  as  follows:  176  Members,  17  Knighted,  6  Withdrawn,
1  Admitted,  1  Suspended,  1  Expelled.  Total  receipts  of  Grand  Commandery,
$273  71.
SUBORDINATE  COMMANDERIES.
No.       Name.                      Location.                           Time  of  Meeting.  Date  op  Charter.
1  Baper,                   Indianapolis.              4th  Wednesday.  Oct.    16,  1850.
2  Greensburg,         Greensburg.                   Sept.        1853.
3  Lafayette,             Lafayette.                   1st  Friday.  Sept.  19,  1853.
4  Fort  Wayne,         Fort  Wayne.  3d  Wednesday.
5  New  Albany,        New  Albany.
  Jany.  23,  1855.
6  Connersville,        Connersville.              1st  Tuesday.  Deer.    7,  1855.
7  Bedford,                Bedford.
  Deer.   2,  1858.
SUBSCRIBERS'"  NAMES.
AURORA.
Edwards,  Wm.  I.,  Carriage  Manufacturer.  Aurora,  51 ;  Aurora  chap.,  13 ;
Aurora  coun.,  7.
Epstein,  A.,  Wholesale  and  Retail  Dealer  in  Clothing.  Aurora,  51 ;  Aurora
chap.,  13  ;  Aurora  coun.,  7.
McKay,  James,  Blacksmith,  Wilmington  P.  0.  Wilmington,  158 ;  Aurora
chap.,  13 ;  Aurora  conn.,  7.
Newell,  John  M.,  Carpenter,  Dillsborough  P.  O.  Hopewell,  80 ;  Aurora
chap.,  13 ;  Aurora  coun.,  7.
Stalder,  Valentine,  Foreman  Blacksmith  0.  and  M.  E.  B.,  Wilmington  P.  0.
Wilmington,  158;  Aurora  chap.,  13;  Aurora  coun.,  7.
Trester,  B.  P.,  Engineer  and  Master  Machinist.   Aurora,  51 ;  Aurora  chap.,  13.
Weaver,  J.  W.,  Commission  Merchant.  P.  M.,  Aurora,  51 ;  Aurora  chap.,
13 ;  Aurora  coun.,  7  ;  Cincinnati  com.,  2.
Watts,  Newton,  Wholesale  Grocer  and  Commission  Merchant.  Friendship,  68.
Weimer,  G.  W.,  Principal  High  School,  late  Superintendent  Aurora  Union
School.    Aurora,  51 ;  Aurora  chap.,  13 ;  Aurora  coun.,  7.
Bailey,  Thomas  J.,  Furniture  Dealer,  2d  Street,  west  end  of  Moore  Street.
W.  M.,  Aurora,  51 ;  H.  Priest,  Aurora  chap.,  13 ;  T.  111.  G.  M.,  Aurora
coun.,  7.
Tuthill,  Aaron,  Book-keeper,  4th  Street.    Aurora,  51.
Pattison,  Thomas,  Civil  Engineer  and  Notary  Public,  corner  of  Main  and  2d
Streets.  Secretary,  Aurora,  51;  P.  S.,  Aurora  chap.,  13;  P.  C.  W.,  Aurora
coun.,  7;  Greensburg  encpt.,  2;  D.  G.  H.  P.  of  Grand  Chap.;  G.  T.  HI.  G.  M.
of  Grand  Coun.
34.
BEDFORD,  LawTenee  County.
Back,  Charles  G.,  Clothing  Merchant.    P.  M.,  Bedford,  14 ;  Bedford  chap.,

--- Sayfa 165 ---
INDIANA.  153
Barnes,  Dean,  Hotel-keepf  r  and  County  Treasurer.  Bedford,  14 ;  Bedford
chap.,  34;  Bedford  com.,  7.
Connelly,  T.  P.,  Minister  of  Gospel  and  Teacher.  Bedford,  14;  Bedford
chap.,  34 ;  Bedford  com.,  7.
Culbertson,  Henry,  Farmer  and  Dealer  in  Produce.  Bedford,  14 ;  Bedford
chap.,  34;  Indiana  coun.,  1;  Bedford  com.,  7.
Dale,  L.  H.,  Stove  and  Tin  Dealer.    Bedford*  14 ;  Bedford  chap.,  34.
Davis,  Henry,  Saddle  and  Harness  Maker.  W.  M.,  Bedford,  14 ;  Bedford
chap.,  34 ;  Bedford  com.,  7.
Duncan,  Wm.,  Parmer  and  Hardware  Merchant.     Tyler,  84,  Jeffersontown,
Ky.
Glover,  James  B.,  Carpenter  and  Sheriff.    Bedford,  14.
Gelwick,  Andrew,  County  Becorder.    Sec,  Bedford,  14;  Bedford  chap.,  34.
Leach,  W.  W.,  Saddle  and  Harness  Maker.  P.  M.,  Bedford,  14 ;  Bedford
chap.,  34 ;  Bedford  com.,  7.
Mitchell,  Jesse  A.,  Parmer  and  Dealer  in  Produce.  Bedford,  14;  Bedford
chap.,  34 ;  Indiana  coun.,  1.
Newland,  Benj.,  M.D.  P.  M.,  Bedford,  14 ;  P.  H.  P.,  Bedford  chap.,  34 ;
Indiana  coun.,  1 ;  P.  G.  C,  Bedford  com.,  7.
Northcraft,  Wm.  M.,  Clothing  Merchant.    Bedford,  14.
Beed,  Samuel,  Methodist  Minister.   Chaplain,  Bedford,  14 ;  Bedford  chap.,  34.
Sabin,  Elijah,  Pres.  State  Bank.  Bedford,  14 ;  Bedford  chap.,  34 ;  Indiana
coun.,  1 ;  Bedford  com.,  7.
Thornton,  Henry  P.,  Attorney,  Ex-member  Indiana  and  Kentucky  Legisla-
tures.   M.  M.  First  Grand  Sec,  G.  L.,  Indiana.
CAMBBIDGE  CITY,  Wayne  County.
Canfield,  Silas,  Cooper  and  Distiller.    Cambridge,  5  ;  Cambridge  chap.,  9.
Claypool,  A.  B.,  Farmer  and  Trader.  P.  M.,  Cambridge,  5  ;  P.  H.  P.,  Cam-
bridge chap.,  9  ;  Fayette  coun.,  6  ;  Connersville  com.,  2.
Cockefair,  James  M.,  Furniture  Manufacturer.  S.  W.,  Cambridge,  5 ;  Cam-
bridge chap.,  9.
Dinwiddie,  Samuel,  Cooper.    Cambridge,  5  ;  Cambridge  chap.,  9.
Newby,  Thomas,  Cashier  Cambridge  City  Bank.  W.  M.,  Cambridge,  5 ;  Cam-
bridge chap.,  9 ;  Fayette  coun.,  6.
Sim,  John,  M.D.     Cambridge,  5 ;  Cambridge  chap.,  9  ;  Fayette  coun.,  6.
Vestal,  Jos.  W.,  Sweet  Potatoe  Cultivator  and  Tobacco  Raiser.  Cambridge,
5 ;  Cambridge  chap.,  9.
Wright,  Samuel,  Assistant  Eailroad  Agent.  Cambridge,  5;  Cambridge
chap.,  9.
COLUMBUS,  Bartholomew  County.
Blankenship,  E.  T.,  B.  E.  Agent  and  Tel.  Oper.  P.  M.,  St.  John's,  20 ;  P.
S.,  Columbus  chap.,  10.
Farrell,  Wm.,  Boot  and  Shoe  Dealer.    St.  John's,  20.
Hamilton,  Dewitt  C,  Fireman,  M.  &  I.  E.  E.  P.  J.  W.,  St.  John's,  20 ;
Columbus  chap.,  10.
Hauser,  Hon.  N.  T.,  Attorney.    St.  John's,  20 ;  Columbus  chap.,  10.

--- Sayfa 166 ---
154  world's  masonic  registeii.
Hinman,  H.  T.,  M.D.,  Jones'  Hotel.  P.  M.,  St.  John's,  20 ;  P.  H.  P.,
Columbus  chap.,  10 ;  K.  T.,  P.  Grand  Sec.
Mathes,  John  D.,  Dealer  in  Books  and  Stationery.  St.  John's,  20 ;  Columbus
chap.,  10.
Johnson,  Albert,  Grocer.     P.  M.,  St.  John's,  20 ;  Columbus  chap.,  10.
Pence,  David,  Builder.     Treas.,  St.  John's,  20 ;  Columbus  chap.,  10.
"Washburn,  W.  A.,  J.  P.    Morning  Sun,  5,  Vermont ;  P.  M.,  St.  John's,  20.
CBAWFOBDSVILLE,  Montgomery  County.
Cumberlin,  "W.,  Merchant.     Montgomery,  50  ;  Crawfordsville  chap.,  40.
Davis,  Jacob,  Com.  Merchant.     Montgomery,  50 ;  Crawfordsville  chap.,  40.
Fry,  F.  H.,  Merchant.    P.  M.,  Montgomery,  50 ;  Crawfordsville  chap.,  40.
Graham,  James,  Dry  Goods,  Boots,  Shoes,  Hats,  Caps,  and  Clothing.  Mont-
gomery, 50.
Knox,  D.  R.,  Crane  Hotel.     P.  S.  W.,  Ladoga,  187 ;  Crawfordsville  chap.,  40.
Langguth,  Ferdinand,  Music  Teacher.  Montgomery,  50 ;  Crawfordsville
chap.,  40.
Manson,  Mahlon  D.,  M.D.  and  Druggist.  P.  M.,  Montgomery,  50 ;  P.  H.  P.,
Crawfordsville  chap.,  40 ;  E.  S.  M.,  K.  T.,  D.  G.
Mayer,  Marx,  Clothier,  of  the  firm  of  Mayer  &  Ullman,  La  Fayette,  Tippe-
canoe County.     Montgomery,  50 ;  Crawfordsville  chap.,  40.
Naylor,  Isaac,  Attorney.     P.  M.,  Montgomery,  50 ;  Crawfordsville  chap.,  40.
Smith,  Samuel  D.,  Agent  Pratt's  Lightning  Bods.     W.  M.,  Montgomery,  50.
Thomas,  John  M.,  M.D.,  Pleasant  Hill  P.  O.  P.  M.,  Pleasant  Hill,  63 ;
Crawfordsville  chap.,  40.
Vance,  W.  C,  Clerk  of  Court.  P.  M.,  Montgomery,  50  ;  P.  S.,  Crawfordsville
chap.,  40.
DELPHI,  Carroll  County..
Applegate,  Jonathan  C,  Judge  C.  P.  and  Attorney.  P.  M.,  Mount  Olive,  48 ;
Delphi  chap.,  21.
Bowen,  Abner  H.,  Produce  Dealer  and  Paper  Manufacturer.  "W.  M.,  Mount
Olive,  48  ;  Delphi  chap.,  21 ;  La  Fayette  coun.,  3.
Buford,  Wm.  H,  Proprietor  Buford  House.  Mount  Olive,  48  ;  Delphi  chap.,
21.
Dugan,  James  P.,  Banker  and  Dealer  in  Pork,  Beef,  Wheat,  Corn,  etc.
Advance,  220  ;  Delphi  chap.,  21.
Horsley,  John  A.,  Sadler  and  Harness  Maker.    Mount  Olive,  48.
Leonard,  D.,  Ex-agent  and  Dealer  in  Stone-coal.  Mount  Olive,  48 ;  Delphi
chap.,  21.
Binehart,  Enoch,  Paper  Manuf.  and  Grocer.    Advance,  220.
Schermerhorn,  Bernard  F.,  Attorney  and  Notary  Public.  "W.  M.,  Advance,
220 ;  Delphi  chap.,  21.
ELKHART,  Elkhart  County.
Davis,  Thomas  G,  Commission  Merchant.   Kane,  183 ;  South  Bend  chap.,  29.
Hutchinson,  J.  H.     Chaplain,  Kane,  183  ;  Fort  "Wayne  chap.,  19.
Main,  O.  H.,  Attorney.     "W.  M.,  Kane,  183 ;  South  Bend  chap.,  29.
Strong,  S.  S.,  Dry  Goods,  Drugs,  Groceries,  etc.    Kane,  183.

--- Sayfa 167 ---
INDIANA.  155
Stillman,  A.  H.,  Dry  Goods,  Groceries,  etc.    Kane,  183 ;  South  Bend  chap.,
29.
Pierce,  Geo.  L.,  Proprietor  Clifton  House.    Monticello,  224,  Ohio.
rOBT  WAYNE,  Allen  County.
Freeman,  James,  Dealer  in  Ready-made  Clothing.  Wayne,  25  ;  Fort  Wayne
chap.,  19  ;  Wayne  coun.,  4.
Gray,  H.  C,  Tanner  and  Leather  Dealer.  Summit  City,  170  ;  Wayne  chap.,
19 ;  Wayne  com.,  4.
Hubbard,  Charles,  Locomotive  Engineer.    Warpole,  176  ;  Ohio.
Orff,  C,  Merchant.  Wayne,  25 ;  Fort  Wayne  chap.,  19 ;  Fort  Wayne  coun.,
4 ;  Fort  Wayne  com.,  4.
Pitcairn,  Robert,  Supt's  Clerk,  P.  Ft.  W.  and  C.  R.  R.  Mountain,  281 ;
Mountain  chap.,  189  ;  Mountain  coun.,  9 ;  Mountain  com.,  11 ;  all  State  of  Pa.
Saunders,  Benj.,  Attorney  and  Justice  of  the  Peace.  Wayne,  25;  Fort
Wayne  chap.,  19  ;  Rec,  Wayne  com.,  4;  Fort  Wayne  com.,  4.
Stelwaggon,  J.  A.,  Foreman  Coppersmith.  Arcana,  272,  Ohio ;  Wayne  chap.,
19  ;  Fort  Wayne  coun.,  4  ;  Fort  Wayne  com.,  4.
ShoafF,  S.  H.,  Wholesale  and  Retail  Dealer  in  Collars,  Saddles,  etc.  P.  M.,
Wayne,  25  ;  P.  K.,  Wayne  chap.,  19.
Strode,  James,  Foreman,  P.  Fort  Wayne  Machine  Shops.    Union,  19,  N.  J.
Taylor,  W.  H.,  Merchant.  Summit  City,  170  ;  Wayne  chap.,  19  ;  Fort  Wayne
coun.,  4 ;  Fort  Wayne  com.,  4.
HTJM'TIH'GTOM',  Huntington  County.
Alexander,  John,  County  Auditor.     Mystic,  110  ;  Huntington  chap.,  27.
Dick,  F.,  Merchant  Tailor.     Mystic,  110  ;  Huntington  chap.,  27.
McGrew,  Wm.,  Master  Builder.     Mystic,  110  ;  P.  S.,  Huntington  chap.,  27.
McCaughey,  Samuel,  Treas.  of  County.    Mystic,  110  ;  Huntington  chap.,  27.
Purviance,  J.  W.,  Merchant.     Mystic,  110 ;  Huntington  chap.,  27.
Purviance,  Wm.  R.,  Books,  Stationery,  Jewelry,  etc.    Mystic,  110.
Wiley,  Joseph,  Clerk  of  County  and  Circuit  Courts.    Mystic,  110  ;  Hunting-
ton chap.,  27.
INDIANAPOLIS,  Marion  County.
Bramwell,  John  M.,  Bookkeeper.  P.  M.,  Marion,  35  ;  P.  H.  P.,  Indianapolis
chap.,  5 ;  Indianapolis  coun.,  2  ;  Raper  com.,  1.
Fisher,  Charles,  J.  P.  P.  M.,  Centre,  23  ;  Indianapolis  chap.,  5  ;  Indianapolis
coun.,  2 ;  Raper  com.,  1.
King,  Francis.  Sec,  G.  L.,  G.  C.  and  G.  C,  and  Rec.  G.  Com. ;  P.  M.  and
S.,  Marion,  35  ;  P.  H.  P.,  Indianapolis  chap.,  5 ;  P.  T.  I.  G.  M.,  Indianapolis
coun.,  2  ;  P.,  Raper  com.,  1.
Meyer,  Geo.  F.,  Tobacconist.  P.  M.,  Concordia,  178  ;  Indianapolis  chap.,  5 ;
Indianapolis  coun.,  2.
Rayhouser,  R.  C.  F.,  Publisher  Ind.  Free  Mason.     Summit  City,  170.
Robinson,  C.  B.,  Asst.  Sup.  P.  and  I.  R.  R.     Humane,  21,  N.  H.
Smith,  Francis,  Attorney  and  Notary  Public.     P.  Secretary,  Centre,  23.
Way,  Freeman  R.,  Master  P.  and  I.  R.  R.     Essex,  Mass.
11

--- Sayfa 168 ---
156  world's  masonic  register.
Weinberger,  Herman,  Cabinet-maker.  Centre,  23 ;  Indianapolis  chap.,  5 ;
Indianapolis  coun.,  2.
Woolf,  Moses,  Clothing  Merchant.  P.  M.,  Marion,  35 ;  P.  H.  P.,  Indianapolis
chap.,  5 ;  T.  I.  G.  M.,  Indianapolis  coun.,  2.
Wiggim,  Lytle,  American  Hotel,  opposite  Union  Depot.  Marion,  35  ;  Indian-
apolis chap.,  5 ;  Indianapolis  coun.,  2  ;  Eaper  com.,  1.
JEFFEKSOITVTLLE,  Clark  County.
Hutcherson,  P.  A.,  Manufacturer  Agricultural  Implements.    P.  M.,  New
Albany,  39  ;  New  Albany  chap.,  17  ;  Indiana  coun.,  I.
Cameron,  A.,  Foreman  E.  E.  Blacksmith  Shop.     Clark,  40.
Lampton,  Wm.  E.,  Steamboat  Pilot  Ohio  and  Mississippi  Eivers.     Clark,  40.
KHTGHTSTOWM",  Henry  County.
Allison,  Eobt,,  Eeal  Estate  Dealer.    Golden  Eule,  16  ;  Knightstown  chap.,  33.
Brown,  James,  Butcher.     Golden  Eule,  16  ;  Knightstown  chap.,  33.
Canaday,  N.  H.,  M.D.     Golden  Eule,  16 ;  Knightstown  chap.,  33.
Crouse,  H.  M.,  M.D.,  and  Merchant.  Golden  Eule,  16 ;  Knightstown
chap.,  33.
Glass,  W.  H.  H.,  E.  E.  and  Ex-agent.  Golden  Eule,  16 ;  Knightstown
chap.,  33.
Peden,  Eeuben,  Millwright.    P.  M.,  Golden  Eule,  16  ;  Knightstown  chap.,  33.
Weaver,  Jno.,  Druggist  and  Jeweler.  Golden  Eule,  16 ;  Knightstown
chap.,  33.
Whitesell,  Jas.  M.,  M.D.  Golden  Eule,  16  ;  Knightstown  chap.,  33;  Eaper
com.,  1.
LAFAYETTE,  Tippecanoe  County.
Amberg,  Moses,  Clothing  Merchant,  east  side  Public  Square.    Perry,  37.
Bansemer,  John  C,  Wholesale  Grocer.  P.  M.,  Lafayette,  123;  Lafayette
chap.,  3  ;  Lafayette  coun.,  3 ;  Lafayette  com.,  3.
Benbridge,  Thos.  T.,  Collector  W.  and  E.  Canal.  Lafayette,  81,  Ohio ;  P.  S.
W.,  Perry,  37 ;  Lafayette  chap.,  3 ;  Lafayette  coun.,  3 ;  Lafayette  com.,  3.
Blackmer,  Collins,  Cashier  of  Lafayette  Bank.  Lafayette,  123;  Lafayette
chap.,  3.
Jenning,  David,  M.D.,  Lafayette,  123 ;  Lafayette  chap.,  3 ;  Lafayette
com.,  3.
Peters,  Herman,  Flour  Manufacturer.  P.  M.,  Lafayette,  123 ;  P.  H.  P.,  La-
fayette chap.,  3  ;  Lafayette  com.,  3 ;  P.  G.  L.  of  G.  L.  Ind.
Eockwell,  Jon.  E.,  Lafayette,  123 ;  Lafayette  chap.,  3 ;  Lafayette  com.,  3.
Taylor,  John,  Proprietor  Artesian  Bath  House,  and  Merchant.  Perry,  37 ;
P.  H.  P.,  Lafayette  chap.,  3 ;  P.  T.  I.  G.  M.,  Lafayette  coun.,  3 ;  Lafayette
com.,  3.
Ullman,  Simon,  Clothing  Merchant.  Montgomery,  50 ;  Crawfordsville
chap.,  40.
LEBANON,  Boone  County.
Dormire,  Eichard,  Tanner  and  Shoemaker.  P.  M.,  Boone,  9;  Lebanon
chap.,  39.

--- Sayfa 169 ---
INDIANA.  157
Dougherty,  L.  0.,  Judge  of  C.  0.  Pleas  and  Attorney.  Boone,  9 ;  Lebanon
chap.,  39.
Evans,  James,  M.D.,  Books  and  Drugs.    Boone,  9.
Hazelrigg,  H.  G.,  Farming  and  R.  Roading.  Boone,  9  ;  Lebanon  chap.,  39  ;
Lafayette  com.,  3.
Nunn,  James  A.,  Clothier.    P.  J.  "W.,  Boone,  9  ;  Lebanon  chap.,  39.
LOGANSPOBT,  Oass  County.
Bridges,  S.  A.,  Merchant.  Tipton,  33 ;  Logan  chap.,  2  ;  Logansport  coun..
11;  Lafayette  com.,  3."
Coleman,  Horace,  M.D.  P.  M.,  Tipton,  33  ;  P.  H.  P.,  Logan  chap.,  2  ;  T.  I.
G.  M.,  Logansport  coun.,  11.
Helm,  Thomas  B.,  Civil  Engineer.     Tipton,  33 ;  Logan  chap.,  2.
Menefee,  Jos.,  Merchant  Tailor.  Greensburgh,  36  ;  Greensburgh  chap.,  8  ;
Logansport  coun.,  11 ;  Greensburgh  com.,  2.
MADISON,  Jefferson  County.
Schmidlapp,  Caleb.  P.  M.,  Union,  2  ;  Madison  chap.,  1 ;  received  degrees  of
Knighthood  at  Lebanon,  0  ;  P.  D.  G.  M. ;  P.  D.  G.  H.  P.
Cope,  David,  Cooper.     Union,  2 ;  Madison  chap.,  1  ;  Aurora  coun.,  7.
Cochrane,  Robert,  Carpenter  and  Town  Librarian.  St.  Cuthbert's,  Scotland  ;
P.  M.,  Union,  2 ;  P.  S.,  Madison  chap.,  1.
NEW  ALBANS",  Floyd  County.
Austin,  Thomas  R.,  M.D.,  Surgeon  and  Physician,  corner  of  Main  Street  and
Public  Square.  W.  M.,  New  Albany,  39  ;  H.  P.,  New  Albany  R.  A.  chap.,  17  ;
D.  T.  I.,  Indiana  coun.,  R.  &  S.  M.,  1 ;  E.  C,  New  Albany  com.,  K.  T.,  5.
Babbitt,  George  S.,  General  Ticket  Agent,  N.  A.  and  S.  Railroad.  New
Albany,  39  ;  New  Albany  chap.,  17.
Hutton,  John  A.  Jefferson,  104 ;  New  Albany  chap.,  17 ;  Indiana  coun.,  1 ;
New  Albany  com.,  5.
Martin,  L.  B.,  Proprietor  De  Paw  House.     New  Albany,  39.
Porter,  Geo.  W.,  Cabinet  Manufacturer.  P.  M.,  Jefferson,  104;  P.  H.  P.,
New  Albany  chap.,  17  ;  P.  T.  I.  G.  M.,  Indiana  coun.,  1 ;  P.  G.  C,  New  Albany
com.,  5 ;  P.  G.  M.  of  G.  C;  P.  G.  P.  of  G.  Coun.
Renshaw,  J.  M.,  Tanner  and  Leather  Dealer.     Jefferson,  104.
Axtele,  Thos.,  270  Main  Street.    New  Albany,  39.
Creed,  John  T.,  firm  of  Jas.  Brooks  &  Co.,  Importers  and  Dealers  in  Queens-
ware,  Hardware,  and  Cutlery,  282  Main  Street.  J.  W.,  Jefferson,  104 ;  R.  A.
C,  New  Albany  chap.,  17  ;  Rec,  Indiana  coun.,  1 ;  Gen.,  New  Albany  com.,
K.  T.,  5.
Dinwiddie,  Hugh,  Steamboat  Painter,  boards  at  Wilcoxson  House,  Market
bet.  Pearl  and  Bank  Streets.    Jefferson,  104;  New  Albany  R.  A.  chap.,  17.
Ecker,  J.  M.,  Photographic  Artist,  270  Main  Street.  New  Albany,  39 ;  New
Albany  R.  A.  chap.,  17.
O'Hara,  Wm.,  Bank  Street,  bet.  Market  and  Spring.    Treas.,  New  Albany,

--- Sayfa 170 ---
158  world's  masonic  register.
39  ;  G.,  New  Albany  R.  A.  chap.,  17  ;  G.,  Indiana  conn.,  E.  &  S.  M.,  1 ;  C.  of
G.,  New  Albany  com.,  K.  T.,  5.
Jeffler,  Isaac,  firm  of  Lutz  <fe  Jeffler,  Grocers  and  Commission  Merchants,
167  and  169  Main  Street.    Jefferson,  104.
Murphy,  Augustus  W.,  Teller,  Banking  House  of  the  Ohio  Insurance  Com-
pany.   Jefferson,  104.
Meurer,  G.  Theodore,  M.D.,  Homoeopathic  Physician,  Market,  bet.  Bank  and
Upper  3d  Streets.    New  Albany,  39.
McCracken,  E.  W.,  firm  of  McCracken  &  Commandeur,  256  Main  Street,
Crawford  Buildings,  Steamboat  and  House  Furnisher^,  also  Tin,  Sheet-iron,
and  Copper  Workers.    Jefferson,  104 ;  New  Albany  R.  A.  chap.,  17.
Rager,  B.  J.,  Elm  and  John  Streets.     New  Albany,  39.
Shields,  James  G.,  296  Main  Street.     Jefferson,  104.
Perry,  L.  C,  General  Insurance  Agent,  289  Main  Street.  New  Albany,  39 ;
New  Albany  chap.,  17.
LAPORTE,  Laporte  County.
Frayel,  Jno.  B.,  Merchant.  W.  M.,  Laporte,  41 ;  H.  P.,  Laporte  chap.,  15;
J.  G.  W.  of  Grand  Lodge;  Chairman  Com.  Correspondence.
Wilson,  Joseph  H.,  Druggist.  W.  M.,  Excelsior,  194 ;  P.  S.,  Laporte  chap.,  15.
MICHIGAN  CITY,  Laporte  County.
Blinks,  William,  Foreman,  Foundery  in  Car  Manufactory.  W.  M.,  Michigan
City,  83.
Bush,  A.  K.,  Carpenter  and  Joiner.     Michigan  City,  83.
Michigan  City  Lodge,  83,  meets  Friday  before  full  moon  each  month.
Meachen,  Edward,  Boiler-maker.     Michigan  City,  83.
Niver,  James  R.,  Moulder.     Michigan  City,  83.
Lewis,  J.  Edwin,  Telegraph  Operator.     Springfield,  4,  Illinois.
Roberts,  H.  H.,  Express  and  Railroad  Agent.     Michigan  City,  83.
Selsby,  John,  Machinist.     Michigan  City,  83.
Sammons,  B.  F.,  Hardware  Merchant.     S.  W.,  Michigan  City,  83.
Sherman,  M.  G.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.  Ogdensburg,  128,  N.Y.;  P.  H.  P.,
Michigan  City  chap.,  25.
Walker,  Henry  H.,  Merchant.  P.  M.,  Michigan  City,  83 ;  P.  S.,  Michigan
City  chap.,  25,  R.  &  S.  M.
Whiting,  Geo.  B.,  Book-keeper.     J.  W.,  Michigan  City,  83.
Wood,  M.  P.,  Master  Mechanic  in  L.  N.  A.  and  C.  R.  R.  Shop.  Greenly,
103,  Michigan.
EICHMOIfD,  Wayne  County.
Burk,  Lewis,  Banker.  Richmond,  196  ;  King  Sol.  chap.,  4 ;  Wayne  coun.,
10  ;  Connersville  com.,  2.
Harris,  B.  W.,  Merchant.     Webb,  24 ;  King  Sol.  chap.,  4;  Wayne  coun...  10.
Kern,  Jacob,  Clothing  Merchant.  Webb,  24 ;  King  Sol.  chap.,  4 ;  Wayne
coun.,  10.
Klein,  Henry,  Clothing  Merchant.     Richmond,  196;  King  Sol.  chap.,  4.
Suffrins,  John,  Hats,  Caps,  and  Furs.     Richmond,  196  ;  King  Sol.  chap.,  4.

--- Sayfa 171 ---
INDIANA.  159
SALEM,  "Washington  County.
Allen,  J.  M.,  Woolen  Manufacturer.     Salem,  21 ;  Salem  chap.,  38.
Coffin,  B.  K.,  Jeweler  and  Local  Minister.    Salem,  21  ;  Salem  chap.,  38.
Durand,  John  J.,  Druggist.     Salem,  21 ;  Salem  chap.  38.
Flack,  W.  0.,  M.D.    Salem,  21  ;  Salem  chap.,  38  ;  Indiana  coun.,  1.
Heffren,  H.,  Attorney.     Salem,  21 ;  Salem  chap.,  38  ;  Indiana  coun.,  1,
May,  James  G,  Pro.  Male  and  Female  Select  School.  Salem,  21 ;  Salem
chap.,  38;  Indiana  coun  ,  1 ;  New  Albany  com.,  5.
McMahan,  D.  M.,  Cashier  Bank  of  Salem.  Salem,  21;  Salem  chap.,  38;
Indiana  coun.,  1.
Menaugh,  John  L.,  Hardware  Merchant.  Salem,  21 ;  P.  H.  P.,  Salem,  38  ;
Indiana  coun.,  1;  Bedford  com.,  7.
SHELBYVILLE,  Shelby  County.
Caughey,  T.  S.,  Merchant  Tailor.     P.  J.  W.,  Shelby,  28.
Elliott,  John,  Banker.  Shelby,  28;  Shelby  chap.,  20;  Shelby  coun.,  3;
Greensburgh  com.,  2.
Hacker,  William,  J.  P.  P.  M.,  Shelby,  28 ;  P.  H.  P.,  Shelby  chap  ,  20  ;
P.  T.  I.  G.  M.,  Shelby  coun.,  3;  Greensburgh  com.,  2.
Janes,  J.  W.,  Manufacturer  and  Dealer  in  Boots  and  Shoes.  Shelby,  28 ;
Shelby  chap.,  20  ;  Shelby  coun.,  3.
Levinson,  Joseph,  Clothing  Merchant.     Shelby,  28 ;  Shelby  chap.,  20.
Morrison,  John.  Ohio,  101,  Va. ;  P.  M.,  Shelby,  28 ;  Shelby  chap.,  20  ;
Shelby  coun.,  3.
Wallar,  Z.  B.,  Mercantile  Salesman.  Shelby,  28  ;  Shelby  chap.,  20  ;  Shelby
coun.,  3.
Wilson,  Isaac  H.     Shelby,  28  ;  Shelby  chap.,  20  ;  Shelby  coun.,  3.
Wright,  Cyrus,  Attorney.  P.  M.,  Shelby,  28 ;  P.  H.  P.,  Shelby  chap.,  20  ;
P.  Dept.  T.  I.  G.  M.,  Shelby  coun.,  3.
SOUTH  BEND,  St.  Joseph  County.
Davis,  A.  M.,  Dry  Goods,  Groceries,  etc.  St.  Joseph,  45;  South  Bend
chap.,  29.
Deming,  Dwight,  Mercantile  Clerk.  P.  M.,  St.  Joseph,  45  ;  South  Bend
chap.,  29.
LABOR  AND  PROGRESS.
Freemasonry  is  emphatically  a  working  institution.  Work,  mental  and
physical,  is  practically  taught  in  every  lesson  of  the  mystic  science.  From  the
time  the  initiate  enters  within  the  portals  of  the  Temple,  the  duty  of  practical
labor  is  enjoined  in  the  symbolic  instructions  given  to  him,  as  well  as  in  the
illustrations  of  the  ceremonials  of  the  several  degrees  of  Masonry.  As  an
Entered  Apprentice,  representing  Youth,  he  is  expected  to  apply  himself  to
acquiring  a  knowledge  of  the  duties  pertaining  to  his  probationary  position  and

--- Sayfa 172 ---
160  world's  masonic  register.
to  prepare  himself  for  more  active  usefulness  in  a  higher  sphere,  that  of  a  Fellow
Craft,  representing  manhood.  Having  acquired  a  knowledge  of  those  duties,
which  voluntarily  assumed,  he  has  obligated  himself  to,  and  exemplified  practi-
cally that  the  lessons  taught  him  were  impressed  upon  his  heart  and  conscience,
and  that  he  is  prepared  for  further  advancement,  the  veil  is  uplifted  and  he  is
led  onward  to  assume  higher  duties  and  additional  obligations  as  a  Fellow
Craftsman.  There  can  be  no  progress  without  labor,  and  advancement  in  Ma-
sonry is,  or  ought  to  be,  based  upon  an  intelligent  application  of  the  teachings
imparted  to  the  candidate.  The  indolent  novitiate,  who  will  not  apply  himself
to  the  proper  study  of  Masonry  as  far  as  he  has  received  the  light,  or  practically
exemplify  its  teachings  in  his  daily  life,  ought  never  to  be  advanced  beyond  the
portals  of  the  Temple.  As  a  hewer  of  wood  or  drawer  of  water,  he  should  be
held  in  a  subservient  position,  as  a  learner,  an  apprentice.  The  diligent  student
alone  has  a  right  to  advancement,  to  further  progress  in  our  mystic  science.
Those  alone  ought  to  be  promoted  to  the  degree  of  Fellow  Craft,  and  in  due
time  to  the  sublime  degree  of  a  Master  Mason.  The  titles  of  the  several  de-
grees indicate  that  of  a  learner,  a  proficient,  and  a  Master  or  teacher.  The  Mas-
ter's degree,  implying  that  the  novitiate  and  probationary  periods  have  been
passed,  although  representing  that  time  of  life  when  men  ordinarily  are  ex-
pected to  cease  from  their  active  duties,  it  is  then  that  the  true  Freemason,
because  of  his  temperate  and  regular  course  of  life,  having  lived  in  accordance
with  the  teachings  of  the  institution,  which  are  based  upon  the  laws  of  nature
and  of  nature's  God,  is  in  the  possession  of  both  mental  and  bodily  vigor,
and  well  qualified,  from  his  mature  age  and  experience,  to  be  a  teacher  in
Israel.  As  development  and  progress,  both  mental  and  physical,  necessarily
result  from  a  strict  observance  of  the  laws  of  nature,  and  the  active  exercise  of
our  faculties  in  harmony  with  the  design  of  the  Creator,  so  the  true  Freemason,
from  the  time  of  his  entrance  into  our  mystic  Order,  will  progress  in  wisdom  and
knowledge,  will  unfold  the  divine  nature  of  his  being;  his  faculties  will  expand
with  age  bo  long  as  he  is  capable  of  active  usefulness,  and  even  as  is  taught  in
the  legend  of  the  Master's  degree, — when  passed  to  a  higher  sphere,  when  raised
from  the  earthly  to  the  invisible  world,  the  spirit  divested  of  its  mortal  body,
will  continue,  as  in  this  life,  unceasingly  to  develop  and  progress  onward  and
onward,  from  one  degree  of  excellence  to  a  higher.  In  God's  world,  progress  is
impressed  upon  all  His  works.  In  man,  created  in  His  likeness,  ultimate  the
ideal  of  His  creations,  and  in  and  through  man  the  grand  design  of  the  Creator
will  be  perfected.  Indolence  and  inactivity  are  incompatible  with  progress,  and,
consequently,  are  inconsistent  with  Masonic  obligations  and  duties.  The  teach-
ings of  Masonry  are  in  harmony  with  God's  laws,  and  labor,  even  when  called
off,  at  refreshment,  does  not  cease.  And  neither  is  the  work  of  Masonry  con-
fined to  the  Lodge  rooms ;  it  is  there  are  taught  those  lessons  which  are  to  be
exemplified  in  our  daily  life  and  practice,  and  in  our  intercourse  with  our  fellow-
roan.
The  workingman  alone  is  the  true  Mason.  The  indolent,  the  ignorant,  those
who  neither  acquire  a  knowledge  of  the  true  objects  and  purposes  of  Free-
masonry, nor  practice  its  teachings,  are  not  alone  drones  and  useless,  but  are
stumbling-blocks  and  impediments  to  the  progress  of  the  institution  in  fulfilling
its  mission  in  the  elevation  and  improvement  of  the  family  of  mau.

--- Sayfa 173 ---
IOWA.
GRAND   LODGE.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  Iowa  was  organized  January  8th,  5844.  Its  Annual
Communications  are  held  on  the  first  Tuesday  in  June.  Its  place  of  meeting  is
determined  on  at  the  previous  Annual  Communication.  The  Grand  Lodge
consists  of  the  Grand  Officers,  Past  Grand  Officers,  and  the  Masters  and
Wardens  of  its  subordinate  Lodges.  The  revenue  of  the  Grand  Lodge  is
derived  from  the  following  sources : —
For  a  Dispensation  for  a  new  Lodge         ....  $10  00
For  a  Charter
20  00
For  each  member  of  a  Lodge
50
Five  per  cent,  on  all  moneys  for  degrees.
For  Grand  Lodge  diplomas
2  00
There  are  151  subordinate  Lodges  in  Iowa,  and  2  under  Dispensation.  The
number  of  members,  as  per  last  returns,  was  4671.  The  returns  of  the  subordi-
nate Lodges  in  June,  5860,  show  502  Initiations,  482  Admissions,  291  Dimis-
sions,  34  Deaths,  110  Suspensions,  and  24  Expulsions.  The  amount  of  Grand
Lodge  dues  paid  was  $2558  75.
The  present  Officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Iowa  are : —
Thomas  H.  Benton,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
William  M.  Stone,  R.  W.  Senior  Grand  Warden.
J.  M.  Griffiths,  R.  W.  Junior  Grand  Warden.
C.  Stewart  Ells,  R.  W.  Grand  Treasurer.
Theodore  S.  Parvin,  R.  W.  Grand  Secretary.
Appointed  : —
John  Scott,  R.  W.  Deputy  Grand  Master.
J.  S.  Dennis,  W.  Grand  Chaplain.
G.  W.  Gray,  W.  Grand  Senior  Deacon.
L.  S.  Swafford,  W.  Grand  Junior  Deacon.
T.  Schreiner,  W.  Grand  Tyler.
J.B.Thomas,      I  W.  GraDd  Stewards.
Kimbal  Porter,  )
J.  H.  Camburn,  W.  Grand  Marshal.
A.  P.  Bentley,  W.  Grand  Pursuivant.
E.  B.  C.  Wright,  W.  Grand  Sword  Bearer.
SUBORDINATE   LODGES.
No.  Name.  Location.  Time  of  Meeting.  Master.
1  Des  Moines,  Burlington.  1st  Monday.  E.  McKitrick.
2  Iowa,  Muscatine.  Monday  on  or  b.  f.  m  J.  H.  Wallace.
3  Dubuque,  Dubuque.  1st  Thursday.  H.  S.  Jennings.
4  Iowa  City,  Iowa  City.  1st  Saturday.  L.  S.  Swafford.
(161)

--- Sayfa 174 ---
162
WORLD'S   MASONIC  REGISTER.
No.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
5  Wapello,
6  Marion,
7  Hiram,
8  Mt.  Pleasant,
10  Keosauqua,
11  Cedar,
12  Eagle,
13  Claypoole,
14  Franklin,
15  Clinton,
16  Ottumwa,
17  Salem,
18  Triluminar,
20  Burlington,
21  Olive  Branch,
22  Pioneer,
23  Grandview,
24  Golden  Rule,
25  Cedar  Rapids,
26  Washington,
27  Mount  Moriah,
28  New  London,
29  Hardin,
30  Ilawkeye,
31  Zion,
32  Hogin,
33  Winchester,
34  Dewitt,
35  Kirkville,
36  Helion,
37  Davenport,
38  Richland,
40  Troy,
41  Liberty,
42  Jackson,
43  Evening  Star,
44  Snow,
45  Crawfordsville,
46  Anamosa,
47  Bentonsport,
48  Lowell,
49  Metropolitan,
50  Mount  Sterling,
51  Bellevue,
52  La  Fayette,
53  Warren,
54  Seevers,
55  Pella,
56  Birmingham,
Wapello.
Marion.
Augusta.
Mount  Pleasant.
Keosauqua.
Tipton.
Keokuk.
Fort  Madison.
Bloomfield.
Fairfield.
Ottumwa.
Salem.
Oskaloosa.
Burlington.
Agency  City.
Fort  Des  Moines.
Grandview.
Rochester.
Cedar  Rapids.
Washington.
Farmington.
New  London.
Keokuk.
Muscatine.
Iowa  City.
Sigourney.
Winchester.
Dewitt.
Kirkville.
Maquoketa.
Davenport.
Richland.
Troy.
Libertyville.
Centreville.
Winterset.
Le  Claire.
Crawfordsville.
Anamosa.
Bentonsport.
Lowell.
Dubuque.
Niles.
Bellevue.
Montezuma.
Indianola.
Oskaloosa.
Pella.
Birmingham.
1st  Saturday  b.  f.  m
Sat.  on  or  after  f.  m.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Friday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Monday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
■  1st  Wednesday.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Monday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Friday  after  f.  m.
Friday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
3d  Friday.
Monday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  after  f.  m.
Friday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  after  f.  m.
Friday  before  full  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Monday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Monday  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  b.  f.  m.
1st  Friday.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  after  f.  m.
Friday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tuesday  before  f .  m .
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Monday  before  f.  m.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
Friday  before  f.  m.
Friday  on  orb.f.  m.
Friday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Friday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Monday.
Friday  after  full  m.
Friday  on  or  b.  f  .m.
Friday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Thursday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Monday.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tuesday  before  f.  m.
Monday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
.  John  Hale.
D.  S.  Carter.
W.  L.  Smith.
Jas.  Shepherd.
William  Hammond.
J.  W.  Stimpson.
A.  C.  Roberts.
W.  C.  Johnson.
J.  V.  Meyers.
T.  J.  Holmes.
J.  M.  Way.
J.  Y.  Hopkins.
J.  S.  Holliday.
F.  M.  Knight.
W.  T.  Smith.
N.  Green.
Geo.  Green.
G.  W.  Teas.
G.  W.  Ringer.
W.  R.  Crain.
B.  F.  Dodson.
Benjamin  Beach.
W.  G.  Hickman.
J.  L.  Hogin,  Jr.
R.  Workman.
Wm.  McKim.
Thomas  Wright.
O.  H.  Watson.
John  Forgrave.
P.  W.  Yost.
William  Pratt.
S.  W.  Wright.
William  Pursell.
Jas.  Gamble.
S.  A.  Russell.
Robert  Dott.     '
C.  Allen.
L.  L.  Beery.
T.  S.  Nairn.
Henry  King.
L.  Miller.
Reuben  Mickel.
G.  W.  Clark.
D.  W.  Gunn.
E.  D.  Morgan.
J.  A.  Archer.

--- Sayfa 175 ---
IOWA.
103
No.     Lodge.
Looaiiok.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
57  Tuscan,
Davenport.
Friday  before  f.  m.
Samuel  Perry.
68  Glenwood,
Glenwood.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays. S.  T.  Marks.
59  Newton,
Newton.
(Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
J.  A.  Harris.
60  Camanche,
Camanche.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m. W.  H.  Hoyt.
61  Oriental,
Knoxville.
Friday  on  or  b.  f.  m. W.  M.  Stone.
62  Vinton,
Vinton.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
63  Chariton,
Chariton.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m. A.  C.  Cameron.
64  Brighton,
Brighton.
Monday  before  f.  m. L.  B.  Fleak.
65  Blackhawk,
Cedar  Falls.
Monday  on  or  b.  f.  m. S.  A.  Bishop.
66  Union  Band,
Frankville.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
J.  M.  Todd.
67  Constellation,
Colesburg.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m. Isaac  Otis.
68  Glasgow,
Glasgow.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
N.  Templeton.
69  West  Union,
West  Union.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m. Robert  Evans.
70  Clayton,
Monona.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
J.  T.  H.  Scott.
71  Bluff  City,
Council  Bluff.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
L.  S.  Hill.
72  Elkader,
Elkader.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
J.  W.  Libby.
73  Bonaparte,
Bonaparte.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m. Oliver  George.
74  Eddyville,
Eddyville.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Peter  Francis.
75  West  Point,
West  Point.
Friday  on  or  b.  f.  m. W.  H.  Stafford.
76  Albia,
Albia.
Friday  before  f.  m.
77  Osceola,
Osceola.
Tuesday  before  f.  m. E.  M.  Laws.
78  Grand  River,
Leon.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m. G.  T.  Young.
79  Mount  Olive,
Boonsborough.
Friday  before  f.  m.
C.  C.  Henshaw.
80  Adel,
Adel.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
William  Ellis.
81  Benton  City,
Shellsburg.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
A.  G.  Gran.
82  Homer,
Homer.
Monday  on  or  b:  f.  m
83  Hartford,
Hartford.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m .  B.  L.  Steele.
85  Epworth,'
Epworth.
Friday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
S.  Welch.
86  Jefferson,
Drakeville.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
H.  Kelsey.
87  Independence,
Independence.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
J.  B.  Thomas.
89  Eureka,
Iowaville.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
90  Garnavillo,
Garnavillo.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
J.  H.  Neitert.
91  Corydon,
Corydon.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
D.  Payton.
92  Delhi,
Delhi.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
93  Lyons,
Lyons.
3d  Wednesday.
W.  W.  Sanborn.
94  Butler,
Clarksville.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
J.  H.  Morton.
95  Mount  Calvary,  West  Liberty.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
S.  A.  Jackson.
•    96  Richmond,
Richmond.
Sat.  on  or  after  f.  m .  N.  Van  Patten.
97  Marietta,
Marietta.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thomas  Mercer.
98  Decorah,
Decorah.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m
99  Nevada,
Nevada.
Friday  on  or  b.  f.  m .  John  Scott.
100  Western  Star,
Clinton.
4th  Monday.
L.  Vandeventer.
102  Osage,
Osage.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m .  J.  L.  Chase.
103  Sioux  City,
Sioux  City.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
L.  D.  Parmer.
104  Abingdon,
Abingdon.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m. J.  M.  Scott.
105  Waterloo,
Waterloo.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
S.  P.  Brainard.
106  Martinsburg,
Martinsburg.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
S.  McGee.
107  Columbus  City,  Columbus  City.
Th.  on  or  after  f.  m, ,  W.  A.  Colton.

--- Sayfa 176 ---
164
world's  masonic  register.
Name.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master,
108  Marshall,
109  Decatur,
110  Capital,
111  Ashlar,
112  Mount  Vernon,
113  Polar  Star,
114  Marengo,
115  Star,
116  Tyrrell,
117  Montague,
118  Toledo,
119  Unionville,
120  Adoniram,
121  Panora,
122  Ionic,
123  Orange,
124  LoTila,
125  Mosaic,
126  Magnolia,
127  Cascade,
128  Pleasant,
129  Bradford,
Marshall.
Decatur.
Des  Moines.
Fort  Dodge.
Mount  Vernon.
Indian  Town.
Marengo.
Swede  Point.
Waverly.
Eldora.
Toledo.
Unionville.
Marshall.
Panora.
Atalissa.
Guthrie  Centre.
Lovila.
Dubuque.
Magnolia.
Cascade.
Pleasantville.
Bradford.
130  StrawberryPointStrawberry  Point.
131  Equity,  Jaynesville.
132  Orion,  Dyersville.
133  Bellair,  Bellair.
135  Bezer,  McGregors.
136  Joppa,  Montrose.
137  Lewis,  Lewis.
138  Fontauelle,  Fontanelle.
139  Springville,  Springville.
140  Nodaway,  Clarinda.
141  St.  Charles,  St.  Charles.
142  Vienna,  Marysville.
143  Palestine,  Millersburgh.
144  Evergreen,  Lansing.
145  Benevolence,  Mason  City.
146  Talleyrand,  Talleyrand.
147  Prairie  La  Porte,  Guttenburg.
148  Fairbank,  Fairbank.
149  Dayton,  Dayton.
150  New  Oregon,  New  Oregon.
151  Afton,  Afton.
152  Newbern,  Newbern.
153  Nishnebotany,  Sidney.
154  Waukon,  Waukon.
155  Patmos,  Mechanicsville.
156  Taylor,  Bedford.
Th.  on  orb.  f.  m.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tu.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  Tuesday.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Th.  on  or  after  f.  m,
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  af.  f.  m.
1st  Friday.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Monday  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  after  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat  on  or  b.  f.  m.
B.  S.  Blaney.
S.  H.  Cummins.
J.  M.  Griffiths.
S.  B.  Olney.
J.  N.  Hammer.
Charles  Gray,  Jr.
A.  Hollcraft.
G.  C.  Wright.
S.  Edginton.
John  Allen.
S.  H.  Sawyer.
D.  N.  Cook.
S.  E.  Zinn.
Allen  Broomhall.
William  Tracy.
J.  S.  Dennis.
H.  M.  Huff.
H.  D.  Crane.
P.  H.  Davis.
E.  A.  Haskell.
Edwin  Denton.
Jas.  Keeler.
Luther  Nichols.
H.  S.  Rogers.
0.  F.  Brewer.
J.  M.  Hawkins.
J.  B.  Carey.
J.  C.  Gibbs.
John  Worrell.
Jacob  Simonton.
E.  B.  C.  Wright.
E.  Evans.
G.  W.  Gray.
W.  E.  Stanbury.
C.  P.  Goodrich.
N.  Rogers.
N.  Pullman.
William  Dewey.
J.  S.  Eisenhart.

--- Sayfa 177 ---
IOWA.
165
Location.
[Time  of  Meeting.
157  Adams,
158  Wiscotta,
159  Morning  Star,
160  Clermont,
Quincy.
Wiscotta
New  Jefferson.
Clermont.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
GRAND  CHAPTER.
Organized  June,  5854.
The  Annual  Convocation  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Iowa  in  5861  will  be  held
in  the  City  of  Davenport,  commencing  on  the  first  Monday  after  the  first  Tues-
day in  June.  This  Grand  Chapter  was  subordinate  to  the  General  Grand
Chapter,  but  at  its  Annual  Convocation,  on  the  16th  August,  5860,  the  follow-
ing resolution  was  offered,  and,  on  a  vote  of  Chapters  being  taken,  28  voted  ay
and  15  nay.
"Resolved,  That  we  believe  the  ancient  landmarks  of  Masonry  make  all  Grand
Masonic  bodies  sovereign  and  independent,  and,  therefore,  we  declare  this  Grand
Chapter  sovereign  and  independent,  and  in  no  manner  whatsoever  subject  to
the  General  Grand  Chapter  of  the  United  States ;  and  this  Grand  Chapter  is
forever  absolved  from  all  connection  therewith."
There  are  26  subordinate  Chapters  in  this  jurisdiction,  21  of  which  made
returns  at  the  Annual  Convocation  in  5860,  which  sum  up  the  following  totals  :
Number  of  members,  631 ;  Exalted,  51 ;  Admitted,  3  ;  Dimitted,  16  ;  Died,  9  ;
Suspended,  15  ;  Expelled,  3  ;  Amount  of  dues,  $852  25.
SUBORDINATE  CHAPTERS.
No.  Name.
1  Iowa,
2  Iowa  City,
3  Dubuque,
4  Washington,
5  McCord,
6  Hiram,
7  Gate  City,
8  Henry,
9  Clinton,
10  Marion,
11  Lebanon,
12  Gebal,
13  Cyrus,
14  Corinthian,
15  Adoniram,
16  Davenport,
17  Mount  Moriah,
18  Tadmor,
19  Siloam,
20  Valley,
21  Aholiab,
Location.
Burlington.
Iowa  City.
Dubuque.
Muscatine.
Fairfield.
Osk.uloosa.
Keokuk.
Mount  Pleasant.
Ottumwa.
Marion.
Winterset.
Newton.
Washington.
Des  Moines.
Vinton.
Davenport.
Camanche.
Knoxville.
Tipton.
Cedar  Falls.
Independence.
Time  of  Meeting.
1st  Tuesday.
1st  Monday.
4th  Thursday.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
Last  Wed.  b.  f.  m.
1st  Friday.
Thur.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  af.  f.  m.
Thur.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  Tuesday.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
3d  Wednesday.
2d  Tuesday.
1st  &  3d  Thursday.
Sept.
Sept.
Sept.
June
June
June
Date  of  Charter.
Sept.  5844.
5844.
5847.
5853.
7,  5854.
2,  5855.
2,  5855.
June  2,5855.
June  2,  5855.
May  31,  5856.
May  31,  5856.
May  31,  5856.
May  31,  5856.
June  1,5857.
June  1,  5857.
June  1,  5857.
June  1,  5857.
June  1,5857.
Oct.  15,  5858.
Oct.  15,5858.
Oct.  15,5858.

--- Sayfa 178 ---
166
world's  MASONIC  registeb.
No.       Name.
LOCATION.
Time  op  Meeting.
Date  op  Chabter.
22  Chariton,
Chariton.
Keosauqua.
Oct.  15,  5858
23  Moore,  U.  D.,
Friday  after  f.  m.
Sept.  7,5859.
24  Jelhro,  U.  D.,
Bloomfield.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sept.  7,5859.
25  Bloomfield,  V.  D., Waverly.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sept.  7,5859.
26  Sioux  City,
Sioux  City.
Thur.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Aug.  16,  5860.
GRAND  COUNCIL.
Organized,  5857.
The  Grand  Council  of  Iowa  meets  at  the  same  place  and  time  as  the  Grand
Chapter.  It  has  five  subordinate  Councils  under  its  jurisdiction,  which,  at  the
Annual  Convocation,  August,  5860,  gave  the  following  returns  :  160  members;
Passed  the  Circle,  15 ;  Admitted,  1 ;  Dimitted,  5 ;  Died,  2  ;  Suspended,  2.
Grand  Council  dues,  $48  50.
SUBORDINATE   COUNCILS.
No.
1
2
3
4
5
Name.
Webb,
Excelsior,
Dubuque,
Washington,
Parvin,
Location.
Muscatine.
Iowa  City.
Dubuque.
Washington.
Keokuk.
Time  op  Meeting.
Thursday  before  full  moon.
Third  Saturday.
Second  Thursday.
Wednesday  on  or  after  f.  m.
Second  Tuesday.
COMMANDERIES.
There  are  4  subordinate  Commanderies  in  Iowa;  no  State  Grand  Commandery.
Three  of_the  Commanderies  have  Charters,  and  1  is  under  Dispensation.  The
Chartered  Commanderies  at  the  triennial  meeting  of  the  Grand  Encampment  of
the  United  States  in  September,  1859,  returned  a  total  of  105  Sir  Knights.  The
following  are  the  names,  numbers,  locations,  and  dates  of  organization  of  the
Commanderies  : —
No.         Name.  Location.  Date  op  Chaetee.
1  De  Molay,  Muscatine.  Chartered,  September  10,  1856.
2  Palestine,  Iowa  City.  "                  "           15,  1856.
3  Siloam,  Dububue.  "                                    1859.
4  Des  Moines,  Des  Moines.  Dis.,  July  10, 1857  ;  Ext'd,  1859.
SUBSCRIBERS'  NAMES.
Bolens,  Eugene  B.,  Attorney  at  Law,  Toledo.     Toledo,  118.
Brewer,  Edward,  Clerk  of  the  District  and  County  Courts,  and  General
Agent,  Independence.  Independence,  87 ;  Aholiab  chap.,  21 ;  Dubuque  coun.,
3  ;  Siloam  com.,  3.

--- Sayfa 179 ---
iowa.  167
Clark,  J.  Norwood,  Fancy  Goods,  etc.,  Iowa  City.  P.  M.,  Zion,  31 ;  E.  A.
C,  Iowa  City  chap.,  2  ;  Excelsior  coun.,  2  ;  Palestine  com.,  2.
Griffiths,  J.  Murray,  Merchant,  Des  Moines.  P.  M.,  Pioneer,  22  ;  Corinthian
chap.,  14.
Jamison,  James,  Attorney  at  Law  and  General  Agent,  Independence.  Inde-
pendence, 87.
Leavitt,  Charles  P.,  Attorney  at  Law  and  General  Agent,  Independence.  In-
dependence, 87.
Marshall,  W.  T.,  Attorney  at  Law  and  General  Agent,  Independence.  Inde-
pendence, 87.
Murray,  Geo.,  Farmer,  Davenport.     Portage,  220,  Pa.
Parvin,  T.  S.,  Professor  of  Natural  History  in  State  University,  Iowa  City.
Grand  Secretary  of  Grand  Lodge ;  Past  Grand  Master,  and  Past  Grand  High
Priest.
Rickman,  Jesse,  Examiner  of  Titles  of  Property,  attends  to  Paying  Taxes,
etc.,  Newtown.     P.  M.,  Newtown,  59  ;  Gebal  chap.,  12.
MAN'S  ONWARD  PROGRESS.
What  was  man  created  for  ?  For  what  purpose  is  he  endowed  with  faculties
which  enable  him  to  penetrate  into  the  deep  silent  bosom  of  mother  earth  ?  To
ascend  above  and  beyond  the  clouds  into  the  regions  of  celestial  space  ?  To
see  the  motion  of  the  stars  and  worlds  revolving  around  worlds  in  the  eternal
domain  of  God's  heritage,  and  to  calculate  with  infinitessimal  precision  their
revolutions  in  their  respective  orbits  ?  What  is  the  design  of  those  aspirations
of  the  soul  which  ascend  to  God  and  the  world  of  angel  spirits,  and  hold  com-
munion with  the  departed  of  earth  ?  What  is  that  death  which  men  in  all  ages
have  been  taught  by  their  spiritual  teachers  to  look  upon  with  dread  and  fear
and  trembling  ?  What  is  God  ?  What  is  Man  ?  These  and  a  thousand  kindred
questions  of  the  highest  importance  the  rational  and  intelligent  mind  is  continu-
ally seeking  to  solve,  and  rightfully,  too — for  these  questions  concern  his  future
and  eternal  welfare.  We  cannot  know  what  God  is,  but  he  is  manifested  in  all
His  works,  the  smallest  of  which  transcend  the  powers  of  the  combined  wisdom
of  all  His  children.  We  know  that  God  is  All-wise,  which  is  seen  in  his  won-
derful creations.  We  know  that  He  is  a  God  of  Love,  as  this  is  manifested  in
all  His  laws,  which,  without  deviation  or  variance,  have  for  their  object  the
pleasure,  the  happiness,  the  welfare,  and  the  progressive  improvement  of  the
beings  created  after  His  likeness.  The  world  and  all  that  it  contains  is  God's,
and  all  is  intended  for  Man's  use,  his  enjoyments  ;  but  it  is  only  as  he  lives  in
accordance  with  the  laws  of  his  nature  that  he  is  capable  of  rationally  enjoying
this  beautiful  world  and  all  of  its  creations.  Is  it  not  possible  that  there  is  a
world  beyond  this,  far  transcending  in  splendor  and  glory  aught  that  appears  on

--- Sayfa 180 ---
168  world's  masonic  register.
this  earth  ?    Man's  life  is  so  brief  on  this  terrestrial  plane,  that  it  cannot  possi-
bly be  that  existence  ends  with  the  dissolution  of  the  body.     The  aspirations  of
the  soul  do  not  belong  to  the  earthly  nature.     May  these  aspirations  not  be  a
wise  manifestation  of  God's  love  for  Man,  disclosing  to  him  in  the  clearest
manner  that  his  nature  is  capable  of  comprehending  in  the  earth-life  that  when
his  probation  here  is  finished,  the  soul  will  continue  to  exist  in  another,  a  brighter,
a  better,  and  more  congenial  sphere  ?    The  immortality  of  the  soul  has  been  an
intuitive  belief  of  every  people  in  every  age.     "Whence  this  intuitive  belief?
This  belief  common  to  humanity  could  not  have  gained  so  universal  credence
without  a  design  of  the  Creator,  and  that  design  could  have  no  other  object
than  the  best  interests  of  man,  to  prepare  and  fit  himself  for  the  enjoyment  of  a
higher  life.    The  indulgence  of  sensual  enjoyments  and  the  gratification  of  the
animal  passions  cannot  conduce  to  man's  happiness  or  spiritual  welfare  in  a
sphere  where  the  grosser  elements  of  earth  have  no  existence.    It  is  plain  then
that  there  are  other  enjoyments,  other  pursuits  in  this  life,  to  conduce  to  and
promote  man's  welfare  in  that  other  and  brighter  world.    Here  we  have  a  pur-
pose for  which  man  is  endowed  with  those  wonderful  faculties  which  enable  him
to  soar  aloft  above  this  mundane  sphere,  and  hold  communion  with  the  spirits  of
the  angel- world.    The  life  on  earth  is  a  link  which  connects  man  with  the  world
beyond,  and  when  he  casts  off  the  shackles  which  bind  him  to  earth,  the  soul  at
once  enters  the  spiritual  sphere  to  fulfill  its  proper  mission  in  the  wise  economy
of  God's  purposes.     The  work  unfinished  here  must  be  continued  there ;  and  as
the  wheels  of  time  roll  in  unending  perpetuity,  so  there  will  be  an  endless  eter-
nity to  progress  in.     In  this  we  have  the  purposes  of  man's  creation,  to  progress,
to  improve,  to  ascend  in  the  scale  of  being,  to  become  better  and  better,  more
holy,  more  wise,  more  truthful,  more  Godlike  ;  and  this  work  ought  to  be  com-
menced in  this  life.    Every  day,  every  moment  lost  in  this  good  work  will  retard
the  progress  of  the  soul.     Every  violation  of  the  laws  of  nature  and  of  nature's
God,  all  unkindness,  uncharitableness,  anger,  malice,  hate,  the  gratification  of
base  desires,  the  indulgence  of  the  grosser  passions,  will  operate  to  prevent  the
unfoldment  of  the  spiritual  nature.    How  necessary  then  for  man  to  begin  in
this  life  to  develop  the  faculties  of  the  spirit — to  commence  the  work  of  prog-
ress here.     And  death  is  but  a  translation  or  change  from  the  earthly  to  the
angelic  sphere — a  necessary  change,  as  it  is  impossible,  clothed  in  his  physical
form,  for  man  to  develop  the  faculties  of  his  spiritual  nature ;  and  besides,  the
earthly  form  is  so  constituted  that  it  cannot  endure  beyond  certain  prescribed
limits,  when  Mother  Earth  claims  it  as  her  own.     The  outward  man  belongs  to
earth — the  soul  or  spirit  to  another  sphere.     It  is  neither  wise,  nor  indicative  of
a  proper  comprehension  of  the  laws  of  the  Creator,  to  murmur  or  repine  at  this
arrangement  of  a  beneficent  and  benevolent  God,  who  doeth  all  things  right.
God's  laws  are  all  designed  for  man's  best  interests,  and  this  law  of  change  is
one  of  wise  and  benevolent  design.     Its  purpose  we  will  fully  comprehend  when
we  cast  off  our  mortality  and  become  inheritors  of  the  world  of  spirits.    The
day  is  not  far  distant,  the  time  will  soon  come  to  all  of  us,  when  we  will  be  ini-
tiated into  the  mystery  of  the  celestial  sphere,  when  the  problem  of  life  will  be
solved.     Let  us  all  then  prepare  ourselves  by  living  in  obedience  to  God's  laws
here,  so  that  the  work  of  progress  may  be  continued,  and  we  ascend  higher  and
higher  in  the  scale  of  being,  and  promote  the  grand  object  of  our  existence.

--- Sayfa 181 ---
KANSAS.
GRAND  LODGE.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  Kansas  was  organized  March  17th,  5856.  Its  regular
Grand  Annual  Communication  is  held  in  the  City  of  Topeka,  on  the  third  Mon-
day in  October.
Its  membership  is  composed  of  the  Grand  Officers,  Past  Grand  Officers,  Past
Masters,  and  Masters  and  "Wardens  of  its  subordinate  Lodges.  The  revenue  of
the  Grand  Lodge  is  derived  as  follows  : —
For  Dispensations  for  new  Lodges
$20  00
For  Charters,  in  addition
10  00
For  every  member  returned    50
The  following  is  an  abstract  of  the  returns  of  5859.  Number  of  Lodges,  32,
eleven  of  which  made  returns,  as  follows  :  Number  of  members,  438 ;  Initiated,
77 ;  Passed,  75  ;  Raised,  83 ;  Admitted,  43 ;  Dimitted,  44 ;  Expelled,  1 ;  Died,
8  ;  Eejected,  50.    .Grand  Lodge  dues,  $219.
The  Officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  for  5859-60  are:—
Richard  R.  Rbes,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
Geo.  H.  Faiechild,  R.  W.  Deputy  Grand  Master.
Columbus  Hornsby,  R.  W.  Senior  Grand  "Warden.
B.  T.  Carr,  R.  "W.  Junior  Grand  Warden.
Charles  Mundee,  R.  "W.  Grand  Secretary.
Christian  Beck,  R.  "W.  Grand  Treasurer.
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.
No.       Lodge.
Location.
No.       Lodge.
Location.
1  Smithton,
Iowa  Point.
17     Topeka,
Topeka.
2  Leavenworth,
Leavenworth.
18     Stanton,
Stanton.
3  Wyandott,
Wyandott.
19     Olathe,
Olathe.
4  Kickapoo,
Kickapoo.
20    Elk  Creek,
Elk  Creek.
5  Washington,
Atchison.
21     Grasshopper  Falls. ,  Grasshopper  Falls.
6  Lawrence,
Lawrence.
22     Paris,
Paris.
7  Union,
Fort  Riley.
23     Palmyra,
Palmyra.
8  Bourbon,
Port  Scott.
24    Osage  Valley,
Ossawattomie.
9  Shawnee.
25     High  Prairie
Leavenworth  co.
10  King  Solomon,
Leavenworth.
26     St.  John's,
Atchison.
11  Ottumwa.
27    Neosho,
Leroy.
12  Emporia,
Emporia.
U.  D.  Aubry,
Aubry.
13  Lecompton,
Lecompton.
TJ.  D.  Auraria,
Auraria.
14  Oskaloosa.
U.  D.  Pacific.
Humboldt.
15  Tecumseh,
Tecumseh.
U.  D.  Arkana.
Doniphan.
16  Lafayette,
Manhattan.
U.  D.  El  Dorado,
El  Dorado.
(169)

--- Sayfa 182 ---
170  world's  masonic  register.
SUBSCRIBERS'  NAMES.
ATCHISON.
Anspacher,  Nathan,  Clerk.    Washington,  5 ;  M.  of  1st  V.,  Chap.,  1.
Russell,  G.  F.,  Builder.    Washington,  5.
Saqui,  Jacob,  Merchant.     P.  D.  G.  M.,  Grand  Lodge ;  Washington,  5 ;  P.
H.  P.,  Liberty  chap.,  3,  Missouri.
TOPEKA.
Gardner,  Thos.,  Harness-maker.    J.  D.,  Topeka,  17.
PORT  LEAVENWORTH.
Mundee,  Charles,  Clerk  of  Quarter-Master's  Department,  Fort  Leavenworth.
Grand  Secretary,  Grand  Lodge ;  Leavenworth,  2 ;  Chap.,  4,  Missouri ;  Western
com.,  2.
THE  INDIAN  CHIEF  TECUMSEH.
Brother  Bobert  G.  Scott,  Past  Grand  Master  of  Virginia,  in  an  address
delivered  before  the  Grand  Lodge  of  that  State,  in  1845,  related  the  following
anecdote,  which,  he  says,  "  is  well  authenticated,  and  vouched  for  by  several
witnesses  now  living."
During  the  last  war  between  this  country  and  England,  a  large  detachment
of  the  Northwestern  army,  under  the  command  of  General  Winchester,  was
attacked  at  the  river  Baisin,  and  after  a  sanguinary  engagement,  was  overcome
by  a  superior  English  and  Indian  force.  The  ammunition  of  the  Americans
being  nearly  expended,  and  all  expectation  of  succor  vain,  they  surrendered,  on
the  assurance  of  their  conquerors  that  the  prisoners  should  be  treated  with
humanity.  But  they  had  scarcely  laid  down  their  arms,  when  the  Indians  com-
menced stripping  them  of  their  clothing,  and  beat  and  insulted  all  who  ven-
tured to  complain  of  such  treatment.  At  length  the  passions  of  the  Indians
becoming  excited,  many  of  the  Americans  were  tomahawked  and  scalped.  "  It
was,"  says  Brother  Boberts,  "  in  the  midst  of  such  an  exciting  scene  that  an
Indian  Chief  with  a  lofty  bearing,  and  .the  expression  of  gratification  and  ven-
geance marked  on  his  countenance,  looked  on  this  work  of  carnage  and  blood.
Many  of  his  best  warriors  had  fallen  by  the  sure  fire  of  the  Kentucky  riflemen.
He  was  chafed  and  maddened  by  the  recent  hot  contest.  In  such  a  frame  of
mind  he  discouraged  not  the  bloody  tragedy.  But  behold  now  this  red  man  of
the  forest !  What  superhuman  influence  has  wrought  such  a  change  ?  Whither
has  gone  that  vengeful,  that  demon  exultation  ?  It  is  the  cry  of  a  Mason  and
a  brother  which  has  reached  him,  a  cry  asking  for  mercy,  and  speaking  in  a
language  which  he  comprehends  and  obeys.  He  springs  from  the  cannon  on
which  he  is  resting,  and  with  the  swiftness  of  the  deer  of  his  native  forest,  he
bounds  among  his  followers  and  warriors,  his  tomahawk  uplifted,  and  with  a
look  and  gesture  which  were  never  disregarded.by  his  savage  soldiers,  utters  the
life-saving  command— 'let  the  slaughter  cease — kill  no  more  white  men.'  This
was  Tecumseh,  a  Mason,  who,  with  two  other  distinguished  chiefs  of  his  tribe,
had  years  before  been  united  to  our  order,  while  on  a  visit  to  Philadelphia."

--- Sayfa 183 ---
KENTUCKY.
GRAND  LODGE.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  Kentucky  was  organized  October  16th,  5800.  Its  An-
nual Communications  are  held  in  the  City  of  Louisville,  commencing  on  the
second  Monday  in  October.  The  Grand  Lodge  consists  of  the  Grand  Officers,
Past  Grand  Masters,  (who  are  entitled  collectively  to  one  vote,)  Past  Masters,
(who  are  entitled  collectively  to  one  vote,)  and  Masters  and  Wardens  of  its
constituent  Lodges.
The  revenue  of  the  Grand  Lodge  is  derived  from  the  following  sources : —
For  Dispensations  for  new  Lodges
$5  00
For  Charters
30  00
For  each  Member
75
There  are  323  chartered  Lodges,  and  8  under  dispensation  under  the  jurisdic-
tion of  this  Grand  Lodge.  Number  of  affiliated  members,  as  per  last  returns,
11,665.  There  were,  during  the  year,  1229  Initiations,  127  Deaths,  57  Expul-
sions, and  220  Suspensions.  Eeceipts  for  the  year  ending  October  1,  5860,
$13,276  87.
The  Officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  for  the  present  Masonic  year  are : —
Lewis  Land  rum,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
Benjamin  J.  Hinton,  R.  W.  Deputy  Grand  Master.
Hiram  Bassett,  B.  W.  Grand  Senior  Warden.
Edward  H.  Hobson,  E.  W.  Junior  Grand  Warden.
Rev.  Hiram  Abiff  Hunter,  Grand  Chaplain.
J.  M.  S.  McCorexe,  R.  W.  Grand  Secretary.
Albert  G.  Hodges,  R.  W.  Grand  Treasurer.
John  B.  Richardson,  R.  W.  Grand  Tyler.
Robert  C.  Matthews,  R.  W.  Grand  Pursuivant.
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.
No.        Lodge.
1  Lexington,
4  Hiram,
6  Solomon's,
8  Abram's,
9  Jerusalem,
14  Mount  Vernon,
16  Paris  Union,
17  Russellville,
18  St.  Andrew's,
Location.
Lexington.
Frankfort.
Shelbyville.
Louisville.
Henderson.
Georgetown.
Paris.
Russellville.
Cynthiana.
Time  of  Meeting.
2d  &  4lh  Saturdays.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
2d  Monday.
2d  &  4th  Thursdays
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
4th  Monday.
2d  Monday.
12
Master.
Wm.  W.  Boyd.
Walter  Franklin.
Thomas  Todd.
Orlando  L.  Miller.
Wm.  H.  Miller.
L.  C.  Stedman.
Thomas  Sadler.
J.  B.  Peyton.
Thomas  Ware.
(171)

--- Sayfa 184 ---
172
world's  masonic  register.
Time  op  Meeting.
19  Washington,
20  Winchester,
22  Daviess,
23  Montgomery,
24  Allen,
25  Richmond,
28  Franklin,
37  Hopkinsville,
40  Amity,
41  Landmark,
47  Fortitude,
50  Springfield,
51  Clarke,
52  Confidence,
53  Warren,
54  Greensburg,
55  Bath,
57  Bloomfield,
58  Benevolent,
60  Lincoln,
61  Hart,
65  Dougherty,
66  Morganfield,
67  Breckinridge,
71  Vesper,
73  Bowling-Green,
76  Morrison,
78  Jonathan,
79  Washington,
80  Augusta,
81  Salem,
82  Clinton,
85  Grant,
86  DeWitt  Clinton,
87  Lebanon,
88  Green  River,
89  Greenup,
90  Anderson,
95  Good  Faith,
96  Moore,
104  Lancaster,
105  Murray,
106  Mount  Moriah,
108  Tadmor,
109  Covington,
110  Warren,
111  Somersett,
112  Fleming,
113  Antiquity,
Washington.
Winchester.
Lexington.
Mount  Sterling.
Glasgow.
Richmond.
Danville.
Hopkinsville.
Millersburgh.
Versailles.
Lagrange.
Springfield.
Louisville.
Maysville.
Harrodsburg.
Greensburg.
Owingsville.
Bloomfield.
Blue  Spring.
Stanford.
Nicholasville.
Carlisle.
Morganfield.
Hardinsburg.
Elkton.
Bowling-Green.
Elizabethtown.
Liberty.
North  Middletown.
Augusta.
Salem.
Princetown.
Williams  town.
Clintonville.
Lebanon.
Munfordsville.
Greenupsburg.
Lawrenceburg.
Florence.
Columbia.
Lancaster.
Murray.
Louisville.
Warsaw.
Covington.
Leesburg.
Somersett.
Flemingsburg.
Louisville.
4th  Monday.
4th  Monday.
2d  Monday.
Sat.  preceding  f.  m.
1st  &  3d'  Mondays.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
1st  Monday.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
1st  Monday.
3d  Monday.
2d  Saturday.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
1st  Monday.
1st  Monday.
3d  Monday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Monday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
2d  Monday.
3d  Monday.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
2d  Monday.
4th  Monday.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
2d  Saturday.
Sat.  preceding  f.  m.
Sat.  preceding  f.  m.
2d  Thursday.
2d  Saturday.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  Saturday.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
1st  Monday.
1st  Monday.
2d  Monday.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Monday.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
2d  Monday.
4th  Saturday.
Sat.  before  3d  Mon.
4th  Monday.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
James  Taylor.
J.  W.  Laughlin.
B.  A.  Beach.
A.  B.  Gatewood.
P.  B.  Hawkins.
T.  Burnham,  Jr.
Jas.  Moore.
A.  W.  Wallace.
B.  Craig.
B.  Hopkins.
■William  H.  Hays.
Thomas  Bradley.
W.  N.  Howe.
J.  A.  Williams.
William  B.  Allen.
B.  D.  Nixon.
H.  E.  Stone.
J.  C.  Keller.
Thomas  B.  Dodd.
William  P.  Ross.
H.  B.  Eaty.
R.  G.  Gardiner.
J.  C.  Prewitt.
C.  E.  Blewett.
G.  W.  F.  Strickler.
William  P.  Tate.
J.  T.  Patterson.
B.  F.  Taylor.
William  H.  Miller.
W.  H.  Barnet.
L.  B.  Dawson.
A.  Corley.
A.  V.  Enlows.
Wm.  G.  Johnson.
O.  C.  Egbert.
J.  W.  Guinn.
H.  W.  Wilson.
L.  R.  McMurtry.
D.  W.  Padgett.
S.  Hillman.
H.  Perrin.
H.  Keller.
B.  A.  Batterton.
John  Farris.
John  T.  Fleming.
A.  W.  Roath.

--- Sayfa 185 ---
KENTUCKY.
173
No.        Lodge.
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
Master.
115  Hancock,
Hawcsville.
4th  Monday.
T.  W.  Thornton.
116  Minerva,
Minerva.
Sat.  of  orpreced.f.m .  L.  T.  Hawkins.
117  Sharpsburg,
Sharpsburg.
Sat.  of  or  after  f.  m. B.  G.  Sharp.
118  Big  Spring,
Big  Spring.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays. T.  C.  Sanders.
119  Wayne,
Monticello.
4th  Monday.
J.  A.  Carter.
120  Mills  Point,
Hickman.
2d  Monday.
J.  H.  Davis.
121  Cadiz,
Cadiss.
Friday  before  f.  m.
B.  D.  Baker.
122  Harrison,
Brandenburg.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
A.  J.  Alexander.
123  Bradford,
Independence.
2d  Saturday.
R.  L.  Bristow.
124  Pitman,
Campbcllsville.
2d  Saturday.
J.  R.  Robinson.
125  St.  John's,
Salvisa.    ■
Friday  preced'g  f.  m
.  J.  E.  McCoun.
126  Liberty,
New  Liberty.
1st  Saturday.
J.  B.  Mordoff.
127  Paducah,
Paducah.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
D.  Y.  Craig.
128  Owen,
Owenton.
3d  Monday.
J.  M.  Suter.
129  Barker,
West  Point.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays. V.  P.  Armstrong.
130  Owensboro',
Owensboro'.
2d  M.  &  S.  b.  4th  M. J.  W.  Compton.
131  Hickman,
Clinton,
1st  Monday.
H.  C.  Watson.
132  Young,
Hodgen  ville,
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
133  Cloverport,
Cloverport,
2d  Mon.  &  4th  Sat. J.  C.  Babbage.
134  Carrollton,
Carrollton.
1st  Monday.
R.  W.  Masterson.
136  Marion,
Bradfordsville.
2d  Saturday.
J.  H.  Allen.
137  Irvine,
Irvine.
3d  Monday.
A.  A.  Curtis.
138  Smithland,
Smithland.
2d  Monday.
J.  W.  Cade.
139  Springhill,
Crab  Orchard.
1st  Saturday.
A.  Carson.
140  Paint  Lick,
Paint  Lick.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
J.  M.  Henry.
142  Blandville,
Blandville.
4th  Monday.
H.  S.  Smith.
143  Madisonville,
Madisonville.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays. J.  G.  Baitey.
144  McKee,
London.
2d  Monday.
J.  V.  L.  McKee.
145  Trimble,
Grayson.
2d  Monday.
A.  Duncan.
147  Mount  Zion,
Louisville.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
C.  Koch.
148  Providence,
Providence.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays. M.  C.  Doris.
149  Cumberland,
Burksville.
2d  Monday.
H.  E.  Williams.
150  Crittenden,
Crittenden.
2d  Saturday.
T.  Ratcliffe.
151  Lafayette,
Lafayette.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
J.  P.  Flint.
152  Alexandria,
Alexandria.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
B.  J.  BealL
153  Holloway,
Sherburne.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
John  Roby.
154  Brooksville,
Brooksville.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
William  M.  Best.
155  Bullitt,
Shepherdsville.
]  st  &  3d  Saturdays. W.  Carpenter.
156  Hartford,
Hartford.
1st  Monday.
W.  H.  Miller.
157  Lovelaceville,
Lovelaceville.
4th  Saturday.
J.  W.  Ogilvie.
158  Bedford,
Bedford.
2d  Monday.
N.  Parker.
159  Col.  Clay,
Covington.
4th  Tuesday.
J.  G.  Egelston.
160  Devotion,
Lexington.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
R.  B.  Parker.
161  Wingate,
Simpsonville.
3d  Saturday.
W.  E.  Powers.
163  Robert  Burns,
Newport.
1st  &  3d  Wednesd'ys  P.  H.  Jeffries.
164  Taylor,
Colmansville.
Bat.  after  or  b.  f.  m .  T.  W.  Hedges.
165  Westport,
Westport.
2d  Wednesday.
F.  S.  Carrington.
167  Joppa,
Lyon  county.
3d  Saturday.
L.  Sills.   ■
168  Casey ville,
Caseyville.
Saturday  prec.  f.  m .  B.  M.  Winston.

--- Sayfa 186 ---
174
world's  masonic  register.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
169  Oldham,
170  Milbume,
172  Roberts,
173  Columbus,
Brownsboro'.
Milburne.
Feliciana,.
Columbus.
174  Good  Samaritan,Lexington.
176  Oxford,  Oxford.
177  Simpson  Ben'olent,  Franklin.
178  Tompkins,
179  Adam's  Fork,
180  Salt  River,
182  Allensville,
183  Madison,
181  Hustonville,
185  Rumsey,
186  Livermore,
187  Mountain,
188  Concord,
189  Simpson,
190  Suwanee,
191  Lewis,
192  Neatsville,
Edmonton.
Ohio  county.
Mount  Washington.
Allensville.
Kirksville.
Hustonville.
Rumsey.
Livermore.
Barboursville.
New  Concord.
Newcastle.
Eddyville.
Portland.
Neatsville.
193  Harry  Hudson,   Middletown.
194  Butler,  Pitt's  Point.
195  Apperson,
196  Sardis,
197  Bryantsville,
198  Mayo,
199  Zerubbabel,
200  Model,
201  Magnolia,
202  Walton,
203  Scott,
204  Bethel,
205  Benton,
206  Albany,
207  Germantown,
208  Graham,
Louisa.
Sardis.
Bryantsville.
Flagg  Spring.
Montgomery  county
Moscow.
Mackville.
Walton.
Stamping  Ground.
Trenton.
Benton.
Albany.
Germantown.
Scottville.
209  Harvey  Maguire  Perry ville.
210  Taylorsville,
211  Wintersmith,
212  Stephensburg,
213  Proctor,
214  Fairview,
215  New  Haven,
216  Napoleon,
217  Gordonsville,
218  Philip  Swigert,
219  Union,
220  Demoss,
Taylorsville.
Garnetsville.
Stephensburg.
Proctor.
Fairview.
New  Haven.
Napoleon.
Gordonsville.
Fisherville.
Uniontown.
Demossville.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
2d  Monday.
3d  Wednesday.
3d  Monday.
Every  Monday.
2d  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
Mon.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  after  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
Tuesday  prec.  f.  m.
Saturday  prec.  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Mon.  &  3d  Sat.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
2d  Sat.  &  4th  Mon.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Monday.
4th  Saturday.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
1st  Saturday.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
1st  Monday.
Saturday  after  f.  m.
3d  Monday.
Sat.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  after  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
Friday  prec.  f.  m.
3d  Saturday.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
Monday  before  f.  m.
1st  Monday.
1st  Monday.
Sat.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  Monday.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Sat.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Friday.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
1st  Saturday.
Friday  prec.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
1st  Saturday.
R.  Mason.
J.  B.  Quigley.
J.  A.  Roberts.
J.  P.  Walker.
C.  H.  Brutton.
J.  H.  Jewett.
J.  A.  Brevard.
G.  B.  Moran.
C.  W.  R.  Cobb.
L.  R.  Brown.
E.  B.  Barnes.
William  C.  Peyton.
H.  Brown.
J.  W.  Rollins.
J.  G.  Eve.
J.  McCuiston.
J.  N.  Webb.
H.  M.  Henson.
J.  E.  Cable.
R.  Robinson.
J.  S.  Roman.
R.  M.  Lee.
G.  W.  Gallup.
J.  W.  Gault.
G.  E.  Hackley.
J.  C.  Demoss.
A.  J.  Combs,
D.  P.  Johns.
J.  S.  Pankey.
M.  W.  Hill.
J.  B.  Kelly.
S.  H.  Sullivan.
R.  F.  Stone.
J.  P.  Pickens.
A.  Doniphan.
J.  W.  Heeter.
W.  F.  Webb.
T.  L.  Burnett.
D.  C.  Evans.
G.  L.  McAfee.
D.  Beatty.
A.  Brown.
G.  S.  Mock.
M.  J.  Williams.
C.  T.  Williams.
T.  T.  Simpson.
William  J.  Sugg.
J.  H.  Fryer.

--- Sayfa 187 ---
KENTUCKY.
175
Location.
Time  op  Meetiko.
Master.
221  Roaring  Spring,
222  Orion,
223  Compass,
224  'Willis  Stewart,
226  Mitchell,
227  Muhlenburg,
228  Bewleyville,
229  McAfee,
230  James  Moore,
231  Bear  Wallow,
232  Dycusburg,
233  R.Riverl.W'ks,
234  Nolin,
235  Hampton,
236  Litchfield,
238  Adairville,
239  St.  George,
240  St.  Mary's,
241  Tyler,
242  Canton,
243  Bedford,
244  Greenville,
245  Carrell,
246  Hope,
247  Fredonia,
248  Ashbysburg,
249  Henry,
250  Pike,
251  Gradyville,
252  Hoffmansville,
253  Ceralvo,
254  Morse,
255  Mount  Gilead,
256  Bigham,
258  Excelsior,
259  Keysburg,
260  Sparta,
261  Trumbo,
262  Hudsonville,
263  Mount  Eden,
264  Burlington,
265  West  Union,
266  Robinson,
267  McCorkle,
268  Wm.  B.  Allen,
269  Dinwiddie,
270  Rochester,
271  Hillsboro',
272  Cassia,
Trigg  county.
Falmouth.
Louisville.
Louisville.
Keene.
South  Carrollton.
Bewleyville.
Cornish  ville.
Christian  county.
Hart  county.
Dycusburg.
R.  River  Iron  Works.
Hardin  county.
Catlettsburg.
Litchfield.
Adairville.
Louisville.
Concord.
Louisville.
Canton.
Paris.
Greenville.
Nicholas  county.
Flat  Rock.
Fredonia.
Ashbysburg.
Campbellsburg.
Newtown.
Gradyville.
Hoffmansville.
Ohio  county.
Madison  county.
Mount  Gilead.
Crittenden  county.
Louisville.
Keysburg.
Owen  county.
Bath  county.
Hudsonville.
Mount  Eden.
Burlington.
Scott  county.
Louisville.
Brooklyn.
Green  county.
Bowling-Green.
Rochester.
Hillsboro'.
Morgantown.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
2d&4thWednesd'ys.
2d&4thWednesd'ys.
Tuesday  prec.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
Friday  of  or  aft.  f.  m.
Friday  before  f.  m.
1st  Friday  b.  2d  San.
1st  Saturday.
Last  Sat.  before  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
Tuesday  of  or  b.  f.  m.
4th  Monday.
1st  Monday.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
1st  Saturday.
1st  &  3d  Wednesdays.
4th  Saturday.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
2d  Sat.  &  last  Mpn.
Sat.  of  or  prec'g  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
Mon.  after  1st  Sun.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
Monday  before  f.  m.
3d  Saturday.
Th.  of  or  prec'g  f.  m.
Sat.  bef.  2d  Sunday.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
Saturday  after  f.  m.
Sat.  b.  4th  Monday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
2d  Saturday.
Sat.  aft.  2d  Monday.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
Sat.  before  full  m.
Sat.  before  full  m.
2d  Monday.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
Saturday  after  f.  m.
Mon.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
C.  A.  Bacon.
J.  J.  Hudnall.
Fred.  Webber.
S.  Thomas.
S.  Carothers.
T.  R.  Clarke.
J.  H.  W.  Frank.
J.  W.  Eastin.
J.  C.  Whitlock.
R.  S.  Palmoer.
William  Redd.
R.  Farney.
W.  F.  Coombs.
R.  V.  Whaley.
R.  Heston.
D.  N.  Hardy.
Frank  Tryon.
M.  H.  Burns.
G.  W.  Johnston.
J.  T.  Gore.
W.  M.  Samuel.
A.  Turner.
B.  F.  Mullakin.
C.  C.  Brown.
J.  H.  Maxwell.
W.  L.  Davis.
L.  E.  Goslee.
R.  H.  Parks.
William  McGinnis.
C.  S.  Hoffman.
D.  White.
W.  S.  Buchanan.
A.  G.  Stewart.
D.  Marcellus.
L.  McHatton.
William  W.  Brown.
J.  W.  Drane.
J.  C.  Burnett.
J.  W.  Calvert.
J.  Fields.
J.  C.  Robinson.
J.  H.  Thompson.
C.  P.  Marshall.
J.  H.  Grider.
E.  Hamilton.
L.  J.  Jones.
M.  T.  Read.

--- Sayfa 188 ---
176
WORLD'S  MASONIC   REGISTER.
No.        Loose.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
273  Zebulon,
Prestonburg.
2d  Monday.
274  Foster,
Bracken  county.
Friday  bef.  f.  m.
R.  N.  Huston.
275  Ansonia,
Logan  county.
Wed.  before  f.  m.
R.  D.  Alexander.
276  Temple  Hill,
Shiloh,  Calloway  co .  Saturday  bef.  f.  m.
T.  Dodd.
277  Edmunds,
Glasgow,  Barren  co .  2d  Monday.
C.  G.  Smith.
278  Meridian,
Poplar  Plains.
Saturday  bef.  f.  m.
B.  A.  Plummer.
279  Murphysville,
Murphysville.
Saturday  bef.  f.  m.
D.  C.  Latham.
280  Woodbury,
Woodbury,  Butler  cc i.4th  Saturday.
J.  R.  Larue.
281  Preston,
Louisville.
lst&3dWednesd'ys
.  J.  C.  Beeman.
282  Eminence,
Eminence,  Henry  co .  2d  &  4th  Mondays.
0.  Fore.
283  New  Retreat,
Wilson's  Creek.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays. J.  D.  Smith.
284  Russell,
Jamestown.
3d  Monday.
William  M.  Green.
285  Oak  Grove,
Calloway  county.
1st  Thursday.
Joseph  Miller.
286  Newton,
Bethel,  Bath  co.
Fri.  on  or  prec'g  f.  m. D.  S.  Trumbo.
287  J.  M.  Bullock,
Christiansburg.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays. J.  P.  Force.
288  Pembroke,
Pembroke.
Friday  before  f.  m.
R.  Y.  Pendleton.
289  Robert  Morris, Concordia,  Meade  co .  1st  &  3d  Thursdays. B.  D.  Calvin.
290  Birmingham,
Birmingham.
2d  Saturday.
T.  W.  W.  Holland.
291  Mount  Olivet,
Mount  Olivet.
Thursday  prec'g  f.  m
,  L.  C.  Holmes.
292  Dunavan,
Petersburg.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays. L.  Troutman.
293  Yelvington,
Yelvington.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays. William  P.  Morris.
294  Johnston,
Webster.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays. .  W.  H.  Perrin.
295  Cunningham,
Lexington.
2d  Saturday.
J.  Stevenson.
296  Mullen,
Rutland,  Harrison co.3d  Saturday.
William  A.  Webber.
297  Hodges,
Whitesville.
Sat.  b.  2d  &  4th  Sab. L.  C.  Anderson.
298  J.  Speed  Smith ,  Willisburg.
Saturday  before  f.  m .  J.  F.  Wilson.
299  Raywick,
Raywick,  Marion  co .  2d  &  4th  Saturdays. W.  R.  H.  Cass.
300  Jamestown,
Newton  Creek.
Sat.  on  or  bef.  f.  m. A.  J.  Ogilvie.
301  Ion,
Pott's  Mills.
Sat.  of  or  bef.  f.  m. J.  A.  Br
302  Harmony,
Mayfield,  Graves  co .  3d  Monday.
J.  B.  Key.
S03  Lewisport,
Lewisport.
3d  Saturday.
J.  R.  Ray.
804  Boone  Union,
Union,  Boone  co.
3d  Saturday.
J.  M.  Stansifer.
305  Bourbon,
N.  Middletown.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
B.  F.  Harris.
306  Garrard,
Buck  Eye.
Saturday  after  f.  m, Joseph  Ray.
307  Forsythe,
Ruddle's  Mills.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays. Eli  Howard.
308  Forest,
Beverly,  Christian  ct I.Wednesday  aft.  f.  m. R.  W.  Henry.
309  Fitch,
How's  Valley.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays. M.  S.  Hill.
310  Calhoon,
Calhoon,  McLean  co .  1st  Sat.  &  3d  Mon.
311  Highland,
West  Liberty.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
William  Mynhier.
312  Paradise,
Paradise.
2d  &  last  Saturdays. P.  B.  Fulkerson.
813  Faithful  Friend ,  Lockport,  Henry  co .  4th  Saturdays.
F.  Gross.
314  Carlow,
Carlow,  Hopkins  co. 2d  &  4th  Saturdays. W.  J.  Parker.
815  Kingston,
Kingston,  M.ldison. Saturday  bef.  f.  m.
J.  D.  Harris.
316  Manchester,
Manchester,  Clay  co .  1st  Monday.
817  Ran.  Robinson ,  Saloma,  Taylor  co.
Saturday  after  f.  m. J.  A.  Marshall.
318  Marks,
Pleasant  Grove.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
J.  M.  May.
319  Mark  Tyler,
Wallonia.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
J.  Bingham.
320  James  F.  Keel, Centre.
Friday  before  f.  m.
W.  S.  Yates.
321  Tompkinsville,
Tompkinsville.
4th  Mon.  &  2d  Sat.
J.  P.  Monro.

--- Sayfa 189 ---
KENTUCKY.
m
No.
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
Master.
322  Alma,
323  Loving,
324  Harreldsville,
325  Poage,
326  Metoalf,
327  L.  M.  Cox,
328  Waynesburg,
329  Woodsonville,
330  Middleton,
331  T.  M.  Lillard,
332  North  Ballard,
333  Preaohersville,
334  Point  Isabel,
335  Beaver  Creek,
Camargo.
Jamestown.
Harreldsville.
Ashland.
Botland.
Fruit  Hill.
Waynesburg.
Woodsonville.
Middleton.
Verona.
North  Ballard.
Preaohersville.
Point  Isabel.
Johnsonville.
336  Ash.  W.Graham.Smith's  Grove.
337  Helena,  Helena.
338  Waco,  Waco.
339  Crotona,  Lodgeton.
340  Thomas  Ware,    Claysville.
341  Miles,  Knob  Creek.
342  Mason,  Maysville.
343  Harney,  Woodburn.
344  Ghent,  Carroll  oo.
345  Golden  Rule,       Covington.
346  Sacramento,        Sacramento.
347  Prathersville,      Prathersville.
348  Pleasant  Grove,  Steubenville.
349  T.  N.  Wise,         W.  H.  Brown's.
350  Marrow  Bone,    Ashmole  Sem.
351  S.  Wingfield,      William  Yates.
352  Stanton,  Stanton.
353  J.  T.  Morehead,  Morelands  P.  0.
354  Hamilton,  Hamilton.
355  J.M.S.McCorkleBrownsville.
356  Steph.  F.  Ogden,Owensboro\
357  Pellville,  Pellville.
358  Newport,  Newport.
359  Sugar  Grove,      Sugar  Grove.
360  Haywood,
361  Baltimore,
362  Wilmington,
363  Polar  Star,
364  Pythagoras,
Massac.
Baltimore.
Fiskburg.
Vanesburg.
Saltillo.
366  Pleasant  Grove  Pleasant  Grove.
367  Ark,  Millerstown.
368  Bibb,  Mount  Tabor.
369  Hinton,  Spence's  Chapel.
370  Ashland,  Mount  Vernon.
373  Trowel,  Mt.  Moriah  Church.
Saturday  after  f.  m.
4th  Saturday.
Fri.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
Tuesday  after  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
Saturday  after  f.  m.
Saturday  prec.  f.  m
Friday  before  f.  m.
Friday  b.  4th  Sun.
Sat.  of  or  aft.  f.  m.
3d  Saturday.
Saturday  after  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Friday  of  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  b.  1st  Sunday.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
2d  Saturday.
Sat.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
3d  Monday.
2d  Wednesday.
2d  &  4th  Tuesday.
1st  Monday.
2d  Mon.  &  4th  Fri.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Friday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Friday  before  f.  m.
Saturday  after  f.  m.
4th  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
3d  Monday.
Saturday  b.  3d  Sun.
2d  &  4th  Weds.
1  st  &  3d  Saturdays.
3d  Saturday.
2d  Wednesday,
4th  Saturday.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
3d  Monday.
3d  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
G.  Parrish.
J.  R.  Duncan.
R.  Harreld
N.  H.  Marks.
L.  G.  Johnson.
J.  W.  Edwards.
E.  Burr,  Jr.
F.  J.  Whitson.
J.  W.  Rutherford.
D.  M.  Anderson.
B.  G.  Tate.
W.  H.  Morgan.
Thomas  Allen.
D.  E.  Bullock.
T.  P.  Dudley.
J.  H.  Craig.
A.  R.  Whitehead.
L.  W.  Nichols.
H.  Bassett.
J.  A.  Chase.
Smith  Wingatc.
L.  C.  Rankin.
J.  B.  Hardy.
E.  Richardson.
J.  W.  Williams.
N.  B.  Griffin.
J.  N.  B.  Hardwick.
J.  H.  Kerr.
Adam  Finch. '
T.  B.  Mclntire.
H.  P.  Hart.
J.  W.  Snyder.
William  M.  Smith.
N.  Porter.
B.  J.  Henton.
J.  H.  Nichols.
John  Ellis.
James  H.  Connell.
James  S.  Crutchfield.
A.  C.  Farmer.
Thomas  Heyser.
Selden  F.  Bowman.

--- Sayfa 190 ---
178
WORLD'S   MASONIC   REGISTER
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
375  Thos.  C.  Cecil,
376  Falls  City,
381  Paintsville,
383  Cannonsburg,
U.  D.  Fraternity,
U.  D.  Fox,
V.  D.  Olive  Branch,
U.  D.  Mintonville,
U.  D.  Cromwell,
U.  D.  Bordley,
IT.  D.  Rio  Verde,
U.  D.  Gasper  River,
Pikeville.
Louisville.
Paintsville.
Cannonsburg.
Tilton.
Dover.
D.  C.  Godsey's  House.
Mintonville.
Cromwell.
Zion  Meeting-house.
Gilead  Meeting-house.
Gasper  River  Academy.
GRAND  CHAPTER.
Organized  December  4th,  5817.
The  Grand  Chapter  holds  its  Annual  Convocations  at  the  time  and  place  of
the  meeting  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Kentucky.  This  Grand  Chapter  dissolved  its
connection  with  the  General  Grand  Chapter  in  October,  5857,  and  is  now  an  inde-
pendent Grand  Chapter.  There  are  69  subordinate  Chapters  in  this  jurisdiction.
At  the  Annual  Convocation,  October,  5860,  there  were  11  Chapters  which  made
no  returns.  The  58  Chapters  which  made  returns  have  a  total  of  1841  members.
The  number  of  Exaltations  during  the  year  was  199  ;  Admissions,  32  ;  Dimis-
sioos,  24 ;  Died,  42  ;  Eejected,  5 ;  Expelled,  2  ;  Suspended,  12  ;  Amount  paid
for  dues,  $1271.
SUBORDINATE  CHAPTERS.
No.  Name.
1  Lexington,
2  Shelbyville,
3  Frankfort,
5  Louisville,
6  Webb.
8  Russellville,
9  Maysville,
12  Winchester,
13  Georgetown,
14  Oriental,
15  Paris,
16  Richmond,
17  Cynthiana,
18  King  Solomon,
19  Temple,
20  Western  Star,
21  Mt.  Horeb,
22  Franklin,
23  Owen,
24  Mt.  Olivet,
Location.
Lexington.
Shelbyville.
Frankfort.
Louisville.
Versailles.
Russellville.
Maysville.
Winchester.
Georgetown.
Hopkinsville.
Paris.
Richmond.
Cynthiana.
Louisville.
Lexington.
Hardinsburg.
Mount  Sterling.
Danville.
Owenton.
Lafayette.
Time  of  Meeting.
1st  Wednesday.
1st  Monday.
1st  Monday.
Last  Monday.
2d  Monday.
2d  Monday.
2d  Saturday.
Wednesday  after  3d  Mon.
2d  Monday.
4th  Saturday.
3d  Tuesday.
Saturday  after  2d  Monday.
2d  Monday.
1st  Wednesday.
1st.  Friday.
2d  Friday.
Saturday  after  3d  Monday.

--- Sayfa 191 ---
KENTUCKY.
179
Location.
Time  of  Meetino.
25  Somerset,
26  North 'Middletown,
27  Washington,
28  Clay,
29  Daviess,
30  Paducah,
31  Rowan,
32  Jo.  Daviess,
33  Elkton,
34  Eastern  Star,
35  Covington,
36  Greensburg,
38  Bowling-green,
40  Swigert,
41  Nicholas,
42  Irvine,
43  Green  River,
44  Bullitt,
45  Glasgow,
46  Millersburg,
47  Sherburne,
48  McClure,
49  Hickman,
50  Benevolent,
51  Napoleon,
53  Bloomfield,
54  Union,
55  Carroll,
56  Lancaster,
57  Clinton,
58  Brandenburg,
59  Stanford,
60  Kelsey,
61  Lyon,
62  Owingsville,
63  Sam.  Reed,
64  Crescent,
65  Henderson,
66  Paint  Lick,
67  Hancock,
68  Mount  Eden,
69  Mayfield,
70  Crittenden,
71  Fleming,
72  Providence,
73  Concord,
74  Burns,
75  Moore,
76  Olive  Branch,
Somerset.
North  Middletown.
Springfield.
Princeton.
Harrodsburg.
Paducah.
Bards  town.
Owensboro'.
Elkton.
Elizabethtown.
Covington.
Greensburg.
Bowling-green.
Cadiz.
Carlisle.
Irvine.
Munfordsville.
Shepherdsville.
Glasgow.
Millersburg.
Sherburne.
Crittenden.
Hickman.
Newtown.
Napoleon.
Bloomfield.
Morganfield.
Carrollton.
Lancaster.
Albany.
Brandenburg.
Stanford.
New  Liberty.
Eddyville.
Owingsville.
Union.
Columbus.
Henderson.
Paint  Lick.
Hawesville.
Mount  Eden.
Mayfield.
Marion.
Flemingsburg.
Providence.
Concord.
Concord.
Fairview.
Newport.
Saturday  before  1st  Mon.
3d  Friday.
3d  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
2d  Monday.
2d  Tuesday.
1st  Monday.
Thursday  after  2d  Monday.
Thur.  after  1st  &  3d  Sat.
4th  Friday.
4th  Monday.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Thursday.
4th  Thursday.
4th  Saturday.
1st  Friday.
Saturday  after  full  moon.
4th  Saturday.
4th  Wednesday.
3d  Saturday.
1st  Monday.
2d  Monday.
1st  Monday.
Wednesday  after  1st  Mon.
2d  Monday.
2d  Monday.
1st  Saturday.
Saturday  after  full  moon.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Wednesday.
Saturday  before  full  moon.
2d  &  4th  Wednesdays.
3d  Tuesday.
2d  Friday.
2d  Monday.
Thursday  on  or  after  f.  m.
4th  Saturday.
3d  Friday.
1st  Saturday  after  new  m.
Last  Saturday.
1st  Tuesday.

--- Sayfa 192 ---
180
WORLD'S   MASONIC  REGISTER.
GRAND  COUNCIL.
Organized  5827.
This  Grand  Council  holds  its  stated  meetings  at  the  same  place  and  on  the
Wednesday  of  the  same  weeks  fixed  on  for  the  Annual  meetings  of  the  Grand
Chapter.    It  has  24  subordinate  Councils  under  its  jurisdiction,  as  follows : —
SUBORDINATE  COUNCILS.
No.      Name.
1  Washington,
2  Warren,
3  Centre,
4  Louisville,
5  Frankfort,
6  Versailles,
7  Maysville,
10  Greensburg,
11  Glasgow,
12  Graham,
13  Kenton,
18  Robert  Morris,
Location.
Lexington.
Hopkinsville.
Danville.
Louisville.
Frankfort.
Versailles.
Maysville.
Greensburg.
Glasgow.
Bowling-green.
Covington.
Hickman.
No.      Name.
19  Boonville,
20  Harry  Hudson,
23  Springfield,
24  Eliot,
25  Kassidean,
26  Philip  Swigert,
28  McClure,
29  Lillard,
30  Sadler,
31  Adoniram,
32  Paducah,
33  Westport,
Location.
Boonville,  Mo.
Brandenburg.
Springfield,  Mo.
Elizabethtown,
Hardinsburg.
Eddyville.
Owenton.
Napoleon.
Paris.
Carlisle.
Paducah.
Westport,  Mo.
GRAND  COMMANDERT.
The  Grand  Commandery  of  Kentucky  was  organized  in  1847.  It  has  4  sub-
ordinate Commanderies  under  its  jurisdiction.  Total  number  of  members,  as
per  last  report,  in  June,  1860,  201.  Amount  of  dues  paid,  $120.  Orders
conferred,  27.
SUBORDINATE  COMMANDERIES.
No.         Name.
1  Louisville,
2  Webb,
7     Covington,
9     Bradford,
Location,
Louisville.
Lexington.
Covington.
Georgetown.
Time  of  Meeting.
4th  Tuesday.
lst-Saturday.
2d  Thursday.
1st  Saturday.
SUBSCRIBERS'  NAMES.
CADIZ.
Tyler,  Quintus  M.,  Principal  of  Trigg  Male  Seminary.  P.  M  ,  Cadiz,  121 ;
P.  H.  P.,  Swigert  chap.,  40  ;  Swigert  coun.,  21.
Tyler,  Eichard  K.,  Farmer.  P.  M.,  Cadiz,  121;  P.  S.,  Swigert  chap.,  40;
D.  T.  I.  G.  M.,  Swigert  coun.  21.

--- Sayfa 193 ---
KENTUCKY.  181
COVINGTON.
Magill,  H.  M.,  Adjuster  Phcenix  Insurance  Co.    Col.  Clay,  159.
Magill,  Rev.  Matthew,  General  Agent  Phoenix  Insurance  Co.,  Hartford,  Conn.,
for  "Western  and  Southwestern  States,  office  31  and  33  West  Third  St.,  Cincin-
nati, Ohio.  Chaplain,  Col.  Clay,  159  ;  Covington  chap.,  35  ;  Kenton  coun.,  13 ;
Covington  com.,  7 ;  Prelate,  Grand  Com.,  Ky. ;  Lexington,  com.,  5,  Missouri.
Magill,  R.  H.,  Adjuster  Phoenix  Insurance  Co.     Col.  Clay,  159.
DYCUSBURG.
Cassidy,  Daniel,  Grocer  and  Produce  Dealer.  Secretary,  Dycusburg,  232;
Secretary,  Crittenden  chap.,  70.
Miller,  W.  Redd,  Parmer.  P.  M.,  Dycusburg,  232  ;  Lyon  chap.,  61 ;  Philip
Swigert  coun.,  26.
EDDYVILLE.
Cobb,  R.,  Attorney  at  Law.    Suwanee,  190 ;  Lyon  chap.,  61 ;  Swigert  coun.,  26.
Huggins,  G.  M.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.  Suwanee,  190 ;  Lyon  chap.,  61 ;
Swigert  coun.,  26.
Pain,  Thomas  P.,  Carpenter.     Suwanee,  190  ;  Lyon  chap.,  61.
Skinner,  Fred.  H.,  Presiding  Judge  Lyon  County  Court.  P.  M.,  Suwanee,
190  ;  P.  H.  P.,  Lyon  chap.,  61 ;  Philip  Swigert  coun.,  26.
ELIZABETHTOWN,  Harden  County.
Duncan,  Thos.  H.,  Merchant,  Cabinet-maker,  and  Parmer.  P.  M.,  Morrison,
76 ;  P.  H.  P.,  Eastern  Star  chap.,  34;  Deputy  T.  I.  G.  M.,  Elliott  coun.,  24.
Strickler,  G.  W.  P.,  Hotel-keeper  and  City  Marshal.  P.  M.,  Morrison,  76 ;
Eastern  Star  chap.,  34;  P.  T.  I.  G.  M.,  Elliott  coun.,  24.
PKAlfKFOET,  Franklin  County.
Hodges,  A.  G.,  Publisher  and  Proprietor  Frankfort  Commonwealth  and  Ken-
tucky Parmer.   G.T.,  Grand  Lodge ;  G.  S.,  Grand  chap. ;  Rec,  Grand  coun.;  K.T.
Swigert,  Philip,  Clerk  of  County  Court,  President  Farmers'  Bank,  and  At-
torney. P.  G.  M.,  P.  G.  H.  P.,  G.  P.  G.  C,  Grand  Secretary  of  Grand  Lodge
and  Grand  Chapter.
GEORGETOWN,  Scott  County.
Gano,  S.  P.,  Physician.  P.  M.,  Mount  Vernon,  14;  P.  H.  P.,  Georgetown
chap.,  13  ;  Bradford  encpt.,  9  ;  G.  C,  Grand  encpt.
Lemon,  James  C,  Merchant.  Mount  Vernon,  14  ;  Georgetown  chap.,  13  5
Bradford  encpt.,  9.
Steadman,  L.  C.  P.  M.,  Mount  Vernon,  14 ;  P.  H.  P.,  Georgetown  chap.,
13 ;  Bradford  encpt.,  9  ;  G.  P.,  Grand  encpt.
Thomas,  Alexander,  Parmer.  Mount  Vernon,  14 ;  Georgetown  chap.,  13 ;
Bradford  encpt.,  9.
GREEHUPSBURG,  Greenup  County.
Waring,  J.  L.,  Farmer.   Greenup,  89  ;  Mount  Vernon  chap.,  23,  Portsmouth.

--- Sayfa 194 ---
182  world's  masonic  eegistek.
HOPKINSVILLE,  Christian  County.
Buckner,  "William  T.,  Lawyer.     P.  M.,  Hopkinsville,  37  ;  Oriental  chap.,  14.
Buck,  Thomas  M.,  Dry  Goods  Merchant.     P.  M.,  Pembroke,  288.
Matthews,  W.  S.,  Carpenter.  Hopkinsville,  37  ;  Oriental  chap.,  14-;  Moore
encpt.,  6.
Poindexter,  George,  Carriage-maker.  Hopkinsville,  37 ;  P.  H.  P.,  Oriental
chap.,  14 ;  Moore  encpt,  6.
LEXINGTON.
Elbert,  John  L.,  Dealer  in  Grain  and  Agricultural  Implements.  Good  Sama-
ritan, 174 ;  Benevolent  chap.,  50.
Krauss,  P.,  Variety  Store.  Late  Mount  Vernon,  14 ;  Georgetown  chap.,  13;
"Washington  coun.,  1 ;  Bradford  encpt.,  9.
McCracken,  John,  Gardner  and  Parmer.  P.  M.,  Lexington,  1 ;  P.  H.  P.,
Lexington  chap.,  1 ;  P.  T.  .1  G.  M.,  "Washington  coun.,  1 ;  P.  G.  C,  "Webb
encpt.,  2;  G.  P.  and  G.  I.  of  Kentucky.
Meyer,  C.  F.,  Dealer  in  Pianos,  Music,  and  Musical  Instruments.  P.  M.,
Devotion,  160 ;  P.  H.  P.,  Lexington  chap.,  1 ;  "Webb  encpt.,  2.
Stone,  Geo.  W.,  "Wholesale  Dealer  in  Old  "Whisky  and  Pure  Liquors,  and
Commission  and  Forwarding  Merchant.  Daviess,  22 ;  Lexington  chap.,  1  ;
"Washington  coun.,  1 ;  Webb  encpt.,  2.
Suhr,  F.  A.,  Tobacconist.  Devotion,  160 ;  Lexington  chap.,  1 ;  "Washington
coun.,  1.
Tipton,  J.  M.,  Produce  Broker,  Commission  Merchant,  and  Dealer  in  Agri-
cultural Implements.     P.  M.,  Lexington,  1 ;  P.  M.  E.  G.  C,  "Webb  encpt.,  3.
LOUISVILLE.
Boyd,  John  J.,  Principal  Louisville  Commercial  College.  Abrams,  8 ;  Louis-
ville chap.,  5.
Cromie,  Isaac.  P.  M.,  Mount  Moriah,  106 ;  Bang  Solomon's  chap.,  18 ;
Treasurer  of  Grand  Consistory  of  Kentucky.
Flannegan,  A.  J.,  Saddler.  Excelsior,  258  ;  Louisville  chap.,  5 ;  Louisville
coun.,  4;  K.  T.
Fleck,  John,  Lard- oil  Manufacturer.   "Willis  Stewart,  224;  Louisville  chap.,' 5.
Leonard,  M.  I.  F.,  M.D.,  Louisville.  Abram,  8;  Hickman  chap.,  49;  Bob.
Morris  coun.,  18.
Mareellus,  Daniel,  Upholsterer.  P.  M.,  Excelsior,  258  ;  Louisville  chap.,  5 ;
Louisville  coun.,  4 ;  Louisville  com.,  1.
Mathews,  Bobert  C,  Tyler  of  all  Masonic  Bodies  which  meet  in  Masonic
Temple,  Louisville.     P.  M.,  Abrams,  8  ;  S.  P.  B.  S.  and  32d.
Morris,  Bob.,  Editor  "Voice  of  Masonry."     Past  Grand  Master.
Muldoon,  M.,  Union  Marble  "Works,  Green  Street,  bet.  3d  and  4th.  Compass,
223 ;  B.  A.  Mason  and  K.  T.
Munger,  William  C,  Printer.  P.  M.,  Covington,  109  ;  Covington  chap.,  5  ;
Kenton  coun.,  13 ;  Covington  com.,  7.
Swain,  M.  B.,  Merchant  Tailor,  No.  4  Masonic  Temple.  Excelsior,  258;
Louisville  chap.,  5  ;  Louisville  coun.,  4 ;  Louisville  com.,  1.

--- Sayfa 195 ---
KENTUCKY.  1 83
PAKIS.
Orr,  Henry  R.,  Dry  Goods  Merchant.  P.  M.,  Bedford,  243  ;  P.  H.  P.,  Paris
chap.,  15 ;  Washington  coun.,  1 ;  P.  E.  G.  Com.  of  Webb  encpt.,  2.
Samuels,  Wm.  M.,  Presiding  Judge  of  Bourbon  County  Court.  P.  M.,  Bed-
ford, 243 ;  P.  H.  P.,  North  Middletown  chap.,  26  ;  P.  G.  H.  P.  of  G.  Chap. ;
Washington  coun.,  1 ;  Webb  encpt.,  2  ;  Gr.  Recorder  Grand  Encpt.
SHEPHEEDSVILLB.
Carpenter,  W.,  Judge  Common  Pleas,  Merchant  and  Parmer.  P.  M.,  Bullitt,
155 ;  Rowan  chap.,  31 ;  Louisville  coun.,  4.
Colbon,  W.  J.,  Postmaster  and  Merchant.  Bullitt,  155  ;  P.  S.,  Bullitt  chap.,
44  ;  Louisville  coun.,  4.
Hoglan,  L.,  Merchant  and  Hotel-keeper.  P.  M.,  Bullitt,  155 ;  Louisville
chap.,  5  ;  Louisville  coun.,  4.
Samuels,  R.  P.,  County  Clerk.     Bullitt,  155  ;  Bullitt  chap.,  44.
Stallings,  Jannus  W.,  Parmer.     Salt  River,  180.
WALLOEITA.
Coy,  W.  S.,  Dry  Goods  Merchant.  P.  M.,  Mark  Tyler,  319  ;  Swigert  chap.,
40  ;  Swigert  coun.,  21.
Wilson,  W.  J.,  Dry  Goods  Merchant.  Mark  Tyler,  319  ;  Swigert  chap.,  40  ;
Swigert  coun.,  21.
Browne,  W.  S.,  Proprietor  of  Excelsior  College,  Bloomfield.  Bloomfield,  57  ;
P.  H.  P.,  Bloomfield  ehapv  53 ;  P.  T.  I.,  Glasgow  coun.,  11.
Carson,  Ransom,  Merchant,  Stanford.  Lincoln,  60 ;  U.  P.,  Stanford
chap.,  59.
Croker,  Thomas,  Family  Grocer,  Smithland,  Ky.  Smithland,  138 ;  Lyons
chap.,  61 ;  Swigert  coun.,  26  ;  Louisville  com.,  1.
Samuels,  Sexton  R.,  Merchant  and  Parmer,  Cane  Springs.    Bullitt,  155.
In  the  year  1090,  under  the  direction  of  the  Bishop  of  Rochester,  who  was
Grand  Master,  the  Palace  of  Westminster,  and  Westminster  Hall,  which  is  270
feet  long  and  74  feet  wide,  were  built.
On  the  accession  of  Henry  V.  to  the  English  throne,  Mansonry  flourished
under  the  patronage  of  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  Dr.  Chichely,  who  was
Grand  Master.
In  the  year  1443,  James  I.  of  Scotland,  who  was  a  zealous  patron  of  Free-
masonry during  his  whole  reign,  was  initiated  into  the  order.
In  1450,  John  De  Medicis  became  Grand  Master  of  Masons  in  Tuscany,  and
greatly  promoted  not  only  the  Masonic,  but  other  arts  and  sciences.
On  the  24th  of  June,  1502,  Henry  VII.  presided  as  Grand  Master  at  a  Lodge
held  in  his  palace,  from  whence,  accompanied  by  a  great  concourse  of  brethren,
he  proceeded  in  ample  form  to  the  end  of  Westminster  Abbey,  where  he  laid
the  foundation  stone  of  King  Henry  VII. 's  Chapel.

--- Sayfa 196 ---
LOUISIANA.
GRAND  LODGE.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  Louisiana  was  organized  July  11, 5812.  It  meets,  annu-
ally, in  the  City  of  New  Orleans  ;  its  Communications  commencing  the  second
Monday  in  February.  "  The  members  of  the  Grand  Lodge  consist  of  its  actual
Officers — the  Grand  Tyler  excepted — and  the  Masters  and  Wardens  of  its  con-
stituent Lodges."    The  revenue  of  the  Grand  Lodge  is  derived  as  follows : —
For  a  Dispensation  for  a  new  Lodge  ....        $50
For  a  Charter,  in  addition
50
For  each  Degree  conferred        .        .  ...  1
For  each  member
1
There  are  111  subordinate  Lodges  in  this  jurisdiction.     The  returns  of  107
•  give  a  total  of  membership,  4661.     Initiations  during  the  past  year,  631 ;  Affilia-
tions, 324 ;   Dimissions,  281 ;   Deaths,  100 ;   Suspensions,  9  ;   Expulsions,  12.
Grand  Lodge  dues,  $6315.    The  receipts  of  the  Grand  Lodge  for  the  past  year
were,  $19,799  69.
The  Officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  for  the  present  Masonic  year  are : —
J.  Q.  A.  Fellows,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
A.  G.  Carter,  B.  W.  Deputy  Grand  Master.
John  C.  Gordy,  E.  W.  Senior  Grand  Warden.
Henry  Begenburg,  E.  W.  Junior  Grand  Warden.
S.  C.  Michell,  E.  W.  Grand  Treasurer.
Saml.  G.  Bisk,  B.  W.  Grand  Secretary.
G.  W.  Mdndat,  W.  Senior  Grand  Deacon.
J.  M.  Bockius,  W.  Junior  Grand  Deacon.
George  W.  Eace,  W.  Grand  Marshal.
John  W.  Pearce,  W.  Grand  Sword  Bearer.
Henry  M.  Crenshaw,  W.  Grand  Pursuivant.
M.  A.  Calongne,
Bruno  D.  Lucas,
B.  Da  Silva,
Gustavos  Sontag,
James  B.  Scot,  Grand'Tyler
Grand  Stewards.
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.
No.       Lodge.  Lccatiox.  Master.  Date  of  Charter.
1  Perfect  Union,  New  Orleans.  A.  Pitot,  Jr.  July  12,  5812.
1  Polar  Star,  New  Orleans.  A.  R.  Morel.  July  12,  5812.
8  Concorde,  New  Orleans.  F.  L.  Nicomede.  July  12,  5812.
4  Perseverance,  New  Orleans.  F.  Ricau.  July  12,  6812.
(184-)

--- Sayfa 197 ---
*         LOUISIANA.  •
185
No.          Lodge.
Location.
Master,
Date  op  Charter.
5  L.  Ami.  DelOrd.
New  Orleans.
Marco  Antonio.
Sept.     24,  5842.
5  St.  Andrew,
New  Orleans.
J.  Lamarre.
June       3,  6839.
19  Humble  Cottage,
Opelousas.
Jas.  Ray.
June     12,  5820.
28  St.  Alban's,
Jackson.
W.  T.  Rogillio.
July      12,  5827.
31  Feliciana,
St.  Francisville.
Samuel  J.  Powell.
March    9,  5828.
88  Phoenix,
Natchitoches.
John  Blair  Smith.
October  6,  5836.
44  Foyer  Ma'nique,
New  Orleans.
H.  J.  B.  Pain.
October  7,  5838.
45  Jackson,
Greenwood.
A.  Flournoy,  Sr.
Jan.      28,  5843.
46  Germania,
New  Orleans.
John  Wild.
April    18,  5844.
47  St.  James,
Baton  Rouge.
Samuel  M.  Hart.
June     28,  5844.
50  Providence,
Lake  Providence.
Robert  N.  Campbell.
April    19,  5845.
51  Minden,
Minden.
J.  W.  Berry.
April    19,  5845.
52  Olive,
Clinton.
G.  W.  Munday.
Nov.     27,  5845.
53  Union  Fraternal,
Farmersville.
John  L.  Barrett.
Sept.     21,  5845.
54  Mt.  Gerezira,
Bastrop.
J.  M.  Brice.
Nov.      28,  5846.
55  De  Soto,
Mansfield.
John  H.  Sutherlin.
March  27,  5847.
56  Lafayette,
Vernon.
John  C.  Jones.
Nov.      27,  5847.
57  Franklin,
Franklin.
John  C.  Gordy.
Jan.      25,  5848.
58  Friends  of  Har'y
New  Orleans.
Samuel  Harby.
April    22,  5848
59  Mount  Moriah,
New  Orleans.
J.  F.  Watts.
March  24,  5849.
61  Western  Star,
Monroe.
Jos.  F.  McGuire.
May       1,  5849.
63  Tunica,
Tunica  Landing.
H.  Hobgood.
Jan.      28,  5850.
65  Geo.  Washington, New  Orleans.
Jas.  B.  Scot.
March    4,  5850.
66  Dudley,
New  Orleans.
William  H.  Stewart.
March    4,  5850.
68  Marion,
New  Orleans.
William  M.  Perkins.
March    4,  5850.
79  Hiram,
New  Orleans.
Timothy  Carroll.
March    4,  5850.
72  Alpha  Home,
New  Orleans.
J.  C.  Batchelor.
Feb.      14,  5850.
75  Sabine,
Fort  Jessup.
Simon  Dove.
March    4,  5850.
76  Quitman,
New  Orleans.
Thomas  W.  Peyton.
March    4,  5850.
77  Mount  Moriah,
Port  Hudson.
R.  W.  Troth.
March    4,  5850.
78  Orleans,
New  Orleans.
C.  F.  Hufft.
March    4,  5850.
79  St.  Joseph,
St.  Joseph.
S.  B.  Stampley.
March    4,  5850.
80  De  Witt  Clinton,
Marion.
J.  Newton.
March    4,  5850.
83  Mount  Vernon,
Logansport.
John  W.  Martin.
March     4,  5850.
84  Oliver,
Alexandria.
Wm.  B.  Hyman.
March    4,  5850.
87  Lafayette,
Pattersonville.
N.  Keys.
March     4,  5850.
88  Many,
Many.
E.  C.  Davidson.
March    4,  5850.
89  Cypress,
Collinsburg.
Jas.  T.  Turnley.
March    4.  5850.
90  Thibod.  Be'lent,
Thibodaux.
A.  Miles  McLeod.
Jan.      21,  5851.
92  Monticellb,
Monticello.
Chas.  B.  Richardson.
Jan.      21,  5851.
94  Napoleon,
96  St.  Helena,
Marion.
Jan.      21,  5851.
Greensburg.
Wm.  A.  Carter.
Jan.      21,  5851.
97  Patmos,
Richmond.
New  Orleans.
Jan.      17,  5854.
98  Hermitage,
Danl.  Wilson.
Jan.      21,  5851.
99  Henderson,
Cotile.
S.  B.  Shackelford.
Jan.      21,  5851.
101  Franklinton,
Franklinton.
John  Wadsworth.
Jan.      21,  5851.
102  Louisiana,
New  Orleans.
Wm.  C.  Driver.
Jan.      23,  5851.
103  Cloutierville,
Cloutierville.
Saml.  O.  Scruggs.
Jan.      21,  5852.
104  Mount  Lebanon,
Mount  Lebanon.
Jan.      21,  5852

--- Sayfa 198 ---
186
world's  masonic  register.
Lodge.
Date  of  Charter.
105  Trinity,
106  Vienna,
108  Sparta,
109  Castor,
110  Harrisonburg,
111  Urim,
112  Bartholomew,
113  Thos.  Jefferson,
114  Friendship,
115  Shreveport,
116  Acacia,
117  Millford,
118  Terry Yille,
119  Constantine,
120  Deerfield,
121  Lisbon,
122  Mackey,
123  Liberty.
124  Kellertown,
125  Pearl  River,
126  Arcadia,
127  Springhill,
129  Dawson,
130  Solomon,
131  Shiloh,
132  Warren,
133  Gordy,
131  Harry  Hill,
135  Plain's,
136  Athens,
139  Houma,
140  Cool  Spring,
141  Huntington,
143  Downsville,
144  Ocean,
145  Hope,
146  Silent  Bro'h'd,
147  Anacooo,
148  Red  Land,,
149  Darlington,
150  Perkins,
151  Eastern  Star,
152  Homer,
153  St.  John,
154  Fillmore,
155  Cherry  Ridge,
156  Kissatchie,
157  Grosse  Tete,
158  Rapides,
Trinity.
Vienna.
Sparta.
Castor.
Harrisonburg.
Forksville.
Plantersville.
Spearsville.
Woodville.
Shreveport.
Plaquemine.
Manchac  Settlement,
Quay  Post  Office.
Waterproof.
Deerfield.
Lisbon.
Ringgold.
Keachi.
Kellertown.
Line  Academy.
Arcadia.
Springhill.
Scottville.
Goodrich  Landing.
Shiloh.
Winnsboro'
Cheneyville.
Bastrop.
Plain's  Store.
Athens.
Houma.
Cool  Spring.
Minden.
Downsville.
New  Orleans.
Vermillionville.
Coushatta  Chute.
Anacoco  P.  O.
Rocky  Mount.
Darlington.
Donaldsonville.
Winnfield.
Homer.
Algiers.
Fillmore.
Cherry  Ridge.
Kissatchie.
Rosedale  P.  0.
Huddlestone  P.  0.
M.  P.  Qainn.
W.  E.  Paxton.
W.L.DeGraffenriedt.
Wm.  M.  Ten.
Thos.  L.  Simpson.
A.  S.  Washburn.
Wm.  L.  Spears.
C.  N.  Howell.
Vincent  Ritchie.
John  Marcot.
J.  B.  Bixler.
J.  P.  Womack.
John  H.  Callaway.
E.  Carpenter.
J.  D.  Cawthon.
C.  N.  Horn.
Abel  J.  Norwood.
Wm.  C.  Warren.
R.  M.  Searcy.
Jas.  A.  Martin.
V.  V.  Thompson.
A.  S.  Manning.
Jno.  W.  Fancher.
Jos.  Pettit.
Syl.  G.  Parsons.
W.  C.  Young.
C.  L.  Hays.
J.  B.  Dunn.
John  L.  Garrett.
A.  Spencer.
Geo.  A.  Stinson.
J.  P.  Warner.
M.  E.  Girard.
F.  L.  Armistead.
John  A.  Brown.
J.  B.  Campbell.
M.  H.  McCraine.
L.  D.  Nicholls.
Wm.  Walker.
G.  M.  Killgore.
A.  B.  Seger.
W.  G.  Springfield.
M.  T.  Simmons.
Jas.  K.  Phares.
John  S.  Whitney.
G.  B.  Burr.
Jan.  21,  5852.
Jan.  21,  5852.
Jan.  21,  5852.
Jan.  21,  6852.
Jan.  21,  5852.
Feb.    2,  5853.
Feb.  25,  5853.
Feb.  25.  5853.
Feb.  25,  5853.
Jan.  27,  5852.
Jan.  17,  5854.
Jan.  20,  5854.
Jan.  17,  5854.
Jan.  17,  5854.
Jan.  17,  5854.
Jan.  17,  5854.
Jan.  20,  5854.
Feb.  14,  5855.
Feb.  14,  5855.
Feb.  14,  5855.
Feb.  14,  5855.
Feb.  14,  5855.
Feb.  14,  5855.
Feb.  17,  5855.
Feb.  14,  5855.
Feb.  14,  5855.
'  Feb.  14,  5855.
Feb.  14,  5855.
Feb.  12,  5856.
Feb.  12.  5856.
Feb.  12,  5856.
Feb.  12,  5856.
Feb.  12,  5856.
Feb.  12,  5856.
Feb.  10,  5857.
Feb.  10,  5857.
Feb.  10,  5857.
Feb.  10,  5857.
Feb.  10,  5857.
Feb.  10,  5858.
Feb.  10,  5858.
Feb.  10,  5858.
Feb.  10,  5858.
Feb.  10,  5858.
Feb.  12,  5858.
Feb.  12,  5858.
Feb.  12,  5858.
Feb.  18,  5859.
Feb.  16,  5859.

--- Sayfa 199 ---
LOUISIANA.  ■
187
No.          LODQE.
Location.
Master.
Date
of  Charter.
159  Morganza,
Morganza.
,    Feb. 16,  5859.
160  Livingston,
Ponchitoula.
A.  B.  Robertson.
Feb.
16,  5859.
161  Brookville,
Lake  Lafourche.
W.  G.  Myers.
Feb. 16,  6860.
162  Burnsville,
Shangaloo.
Shelby  Baucum.
Feb. 16,  5860.
163  Atchafalaya,
Siramsport.
J.  B.  Robinson.
Feb. 16,  5860.
164  Columbia,
Columbia.
Wade  H.  Hough.
Feb. 16,  5860.
165  Lake  Charles, Lake  Charles.
Joel  Sanders.
Feb. ]6,  5860.
U.  D.  Linn  Wood,
Jefferson  City.
T.  McGinnis.
Feb. 20,  5860.
U.  D.  Silenoio,
New  Orleans.
Vin.  A.  De  Castro.
Feb. 22,  5860.
GRAND    CHAPTER.
Organized  May  1st,  5848.
This  Grand  Chapter  is  subordinate  to  the  General  Grand  Chapter.  It  holds
its  Annual  Convocations  in  the  City  of  New  Orleans  on  the  second  Tuesday
in  February.  It  has  21  subordinate  Chapters,  19  of  which  made  returns  at  the
last  Annual  Convocation  in  5860,  as  follows  :  Total  number  of  Members,  817 ;
Exalted,  132  ;  Admitted,  20  ;  Dimitted,  43 ;  Died,  26  ;  Suspended,  8.  Amount
of  dues  paid,  $864.
SUBORDINATE  CHAPTERS.
No.       Name.
1  Orleans,
2  Concorde,
3  Perseverance,
4  Clinton,
5  Washington,
8  Tyre,
9  D.  F.  Reeder,
10  Shreveport,
11  Bayou  Sara,
12  Cyrus,
13  Madison,
14  De  Soto,
15  Delta,
16  Living  Stone,
17  Minden,
18  Monroe,
21  Polar  Star,
22  Mount  Lebanon,
23  Woodville,
24  Homer,
25  Spring  Hill,
Location.
New  Orleans.
New  Orleans.
New  Orleans.
Clinton.
Baton  Rouge.
Lake  Providence.
Farmersville.
Shreveport.
St.  Francisville.
Franklin.
Richmond.
Mansfield.
New  Orleans.
Bastrop.
Minden.
Monroe.
New  Orleans.
Mount  Lebanon.
Woodville.
Homer.
Spring  Hill.
Time  op  Meeting.
Every  Monday.
Every  Friday.
First  Monday.
First  Wednesday.
First  Monday.
Fourth  Saturday.
Second  Saturday.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
Fourth  Saturday.
Second  Tuesday.
Charter  surrendered.
Second  Saturday.
Every  Thursday.
First  Wednesday.
Friday  b.  2d  Saturday.
Second  Saturday.
Every  Saturday.
Fourth  Saturday.
3d  Thursday.
Fourth  Tuesday.
Third  Friday.
GRAND  COUNCIL.
Organized  February  16th,  5856.
It  holds  its  Annual  Sessions  in  the  City  of  New  Orleans,  in  February.
4  subordinate  Councils,  having  a  total  membership  of  229.
13
It  has

--- Sayfa 200 ---
188
world's  masonic  register.
No.       Name.
1  Holland,
2  Louisiana,
SUBORDINATE  COUNCILS.
Location.
New  Orleans.
New  Orleans.
No.        Name.
3  Providence,
4  Orleans,
Location.
Lake  Providence.
New  Orleans.
COMMANDERIES.
There  are  3  Commanderies  in  Louisiana,  viz.: —
Indivisible  Friends,  1,  chartered  by  the  Grand  Encampment  of  New  York,
and  recognized  by  the  General  Grand  Encampment  in  1838.  It  reported  28
members  at  the  Triennial  meeting  of  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the  U.  S.  in
1859.
Jacques  de  Molay,  2,  chartered  April  25th,  1851,  and  reported,  in  1859,  47
members.
Orleans  Commandery,  for  which  the  M.  E.  Grand  Master,  B.  B.  French,
issued  a  dispensation,  May  19,  1860.
All  of  these  Commanderies  are  located  at  New  Orleans.
SUBSCRIBERS'    NAMES.
COUSHATTA  CHUTE.
Annistead,  Franklin  L.,  Planter.     S.  "W.,  Silent  Brotherhood,  146  ;  R.  A.  31.
Armistead,  Wm.  "W.,  Planter.     Treasurer,  Silent  Brotherhood,  146.
Belcher,  3Vm.  H.,  Carpenter.     Silent  Brotherhood,  146.
Childers,  Zachariah.    J.  D.,  Silent  Brotherhood,  146.
Clark,  Saml.,  Planter.    S.  D.,  Silent  Brotherhood,  146.
De  Bruhl,  E.  C,  Planter.     Silent  Brotherhood,  146.
Franklin,  Granville,  Planter.     Silent  Brotherhood,  146.
Gandy,  Edward,  Planter.     Silent  Brotherhood,  146.
Hailey,  Andes  B.,  Planter.     Silent  Brotherhood,  146.
Hammett,  Kobt.  E.,  Planter,  Campti,  La.     Silent  Brotherhood,  146.
Hovey,  David,  Planter.    Silent  Brotherhood,  146.
Hugh,  Robt.  F.,  Planter.     Silent  Brotherhood,  146.
Jones,  Geo.  W.     Silent  Brotherhood,  146  ;  Chap.  22.
Lee,  Ben.  S.,  Planter.     Silent  Brotherhood,  146.
Lisso,  Abm.  M.,  Merchant.     Silent  Brotherhood,  146.
Lisso,  Julius.    Secretary,  Silent  Brotherhood,  146  ;  Chap.  22.
Lisso,  Mark,  Merchant.     Silent  Brotherhood,  146.
McCurday,  R.  A.  L.,  Carpenter.     Silent  Brotherhood,  146  ;  R.  A.  M.
Mclnnis,  D.  F.,  Physician.     Silent  Brotherhood,  146.
Murph,  John  E.    W.  M.,  Silent  Brotherhood,  146 ;  Chap.  22.
Rowland,  M.,  Planter.    Silent  Brotherhood,  146.
Stallings,  M.  H.,  Planter.    Silent  Brotherhood,  146.

--- Sayfa 201 ---
LOUISIANA.  189
Weatherford,  Geo.  W.    Tyler,  Silent  Brotherhood,  146.
Wilson,  J.  Thomas,  Planter.    Silent  Brotherhood,  146.
Wynn,  Geo.  H.    J.  W.,  Silent  Brotherhood,  146.
NEW  OBLEANB.
Clark,  John  H.,  Photographer,  94  Canal  St.  Friends  of  Harmony,  58  ;  Polar
Star  chap.,  21.
Davis,  Wm.,  175  Poydras  St.    Treas.,  Hiram,  70.
De  Sola,  Aaron.     Secretary,  Friends  of  Harmony,  58  ;  Delta  chap.,  15.
Dostie,  A.  P.,  Dentist,  10  Barronne  St.    W.  M.,  Orleans,  78  ;  Delta  chap.,  15.
Gay,  Stephen,  Editor  Commercial  Bulletin.     Friends  of  Harmony,  58.
Gensler,  S.,  Cloths,  93  Chartres  St.    Alpha,  72 ;  Orleans  chap.,  1.
Ivens,  Ed.  M.,  Machinist,  cor.  Union  and  St.  Charles  Sts.     Dudley,  66.
Lucas,  Bruno  de.,  Liquor  Merchant,  cor.  Lafayette  and  Baronne  Sts.  S.  W.,
Los  Amigos  del  Orden,  5 ;  Concord  chap.,  2 ;  Treas.,  Holland  coun.,  1 ;  Los  Amigos
del  Orden  chap.,  Rose  Croix  ;  Los  Amigos  del  Orden  coun.  of  Kadosh,  7  ;  In-
divisible Friends  com.,  1 ;  Grand  Consistory  of  Louisiana  32d ;  Grand  Steward
of  Grand  Lodge.
Magner,  Joseph,  20  Carondolet  St.     Ocean,  144;  Concord  chap.,  2.
Moses,  Gustave.  Foyer  Maconnique,  44;  Foyer  Maconnique  chap.,  R.\  E.\
6 ;  Foyer  Maconnique  coun.,  K.\  K.\  8.
Pendergrast,  Laurence,  Accountant.    Dudley,  66.
Bisk,  Samuel  G.  B.  W.  G.  S.,  Grand  Lodge  and  Grand  Chapter,  Louisiana  ;
P.  M.  and  S.,  George  Washington,  65  ;  King  Orleans  chap.,  1 ;  P.  T.  I.  G.  M.,
Orleans  coun.,  4 ;  G.  K.,  Grand  Council ;  Prelate,  Jaques  De  Molay  com.,  2  ;
Soy.-.  G.\  Ins.1.  Gen.-.  33d  deg. ;  H.  M.,  Supreme  Council,  33d  deg.,  for  Southern
Jurisdiction  of  United  States ;  G.  G.  Sec'y  of  G.  G.  Chapter,  and  G.  Bee.  of
Grand  Encampment  of  U.  S.
Rollins,  Joseph,  Hair  Dresser,  Perfumer,  and  Bathing.
Santini,  Joseph.  P.  M.,  Foyer  Maconnique,  44  ;  Delta  chap.,  15  ;  0.  of  W.,
Louisiana  coun. ;  M.\  W.\  Foyer  Maconnique  chap.,  R.\  C.\  6  ;  T.-.  P.-.  G.\  M.\
of  Foyer  Maconnique  coun.  of  Kadosh,  8 ;  Grand  Consistory  of  Prince  of  R.\  S.\
32d  deg.
Whetstone,  John  H.,  M.D.,  Auburn.  P.  D.  G.  M.  of  Grand  Lodge  of  Ala-
bama ;  P.  M.,  Autauga,  31,  Ala. ;  Living  Stone  chap.,  16.
CONSERVATISM.
Thbee  is  a  class  of  Masons  so  very  conservative — and  they  are  by  no  means
few  in  number,  nor  confined  altogether  to  the  uneducated — who  never  advance
one  peg  in  Masonic  knowledge  beyond  what  they  were  taught  when  the  degrees
of  Masonry  were  conferred  upon  them,  who  entertain  the  opinion  that  a  Freemason
ought  not  to  know  anything  of  the  history  of  the  institution — of  its  statistics — of
its  symbolism — or  the  origin  of  the  rites  and  ceremonials  of  the  order,  its  tradi-

--- Sayfa 202 ---
190  world's  masonic  register.
tions,  etc.,  etc.,  that  all  this  knowledge  ought  to  be  hid  from  the  light  of  day
and  buried  in  oblivion  forever.  This  is,  in  plain,  simple  language,  the  sentiment
of  those  who  are  opposed  to  Masonic  publications ;  and  to  shield  themselves  in
their  ignorance,  they  use  that  convenient  expression,  that  "  Masonry  is  a  con-
servative institution."  We  will  grant  that  Masonry  is  a  conservative  institution
so  far  as  that  its  landmarks  are  unchangeable;  but  he  who  would  infer  from  that
that  its  aims  and  purposes  are  incapable  of  further  unfoldment,  or  that  no  advance-
ment nor  progress  has  been  made  in  the  development  of  its  principles  since  the
organization  of  the  order,  betrays  gross  ignorance  of  its  past  history.  An  insti-
tution whose  aim  and  purpose  are  to  improve  and  elevate  man,  cannot  be  conserva-
tive in  all  respects ;  the  platform  of  yesterday  must  be  elevated  to  conform  to  the
increased  light  of  to-day.  There  must  of  necessity  be  a  continual  change,  an
advance,  an  upward  and  onward  progress  as  we  increase  in  knowledge  from  day
to  day  of  the  duties  we  owe  to  God,  our  neighbor,  and  ourselves.  It  is  idle  to
attempt  to  prevent  Freemasonry  from  advancing  with  the  intellectual  advance-
ment of  the  age.  The  Freemasonry  of  to-day  is  far  in  advance  of  the  Free-
masonry of  one  hundred  years  ago  in  its  system  of  government,  its  system  of
charities,  but  more  particularly  in  the  acquisition  of  the  knowledge  of  its  past
history  and  an  increased  knowledge  of  its  principles,  its  mission,  and  its  aims
and  purposes.  None  but  the  willfully  blind,  the  ignorant,  or  those  who  cannot
see  in  Freemasonry  anything  above  its  signs  and  passwords,  can  be  hostile  to
the  dissemination  of  Masonic  light  and  knowledge.  The  man  who  is  content
with  the  knowledge  he  is  in  possession  of,  and  closes  up  his  intellect  to  the  ad-
mission of  more  light,  however  absurd  such  an  idea  may  seem,  fairly  represents
the  stand-still,  conservative  Mason.
Freemasonry  is  progressive,  and  is  continually  unfolding  the  mysteries  con-
tained in  the  volume  of  inspirational  nature.  As  the  pages  turn  over  day  by
day  of  the  unrevealed  Book,  the  light  of  science  shines  more  brightly — thoughts
are  elicited  from  the  active  workshop  of  the  mind,  and  each  leaf  is  impressed  with
the  knowledge  acquired  by  experience,  the  child  of  wisdom.  The  indolent  Ma-
son, with  conservatism  as  his  shield,  is  impenetrable  to  the  rays  of  light  which
gleam  from  the  intelligent  mind.  He  is  wise  in  his  own  conceit — he  has  reached
the  highest  point  of  human  wisdom — no  one  can  give  him  information  that  he  is
not  possessed  of  already — his  understanding  equals  that  of  the  highest  de-
veloped finite  mind,  and,  wrapt  in  his  own  self-conceit,  he  is  impervious  to  the
reception  of  light,  and  repels  the  golden  rays  emitted  from  heaven.  This  is
the  conservative  Mason,  who  stands  on  an  unchangeable  platform,  who  will  not
improve  because  he  will  not  admit  the  possibility  of  progress — who  will  Dot
seek  for  light,  more  light,  because  he  will  not  step  beyond  the  first  lessons
which  were  taught  him.  This  class  of  Masons  is  incapable  of  comprehending
the  esoteric  teachings  of  Freemasonry.  All  intelligent  Masons  are,  in  the  pro-
per sense  of  the  term,  in  regard  to  the  landmarks  of  Freemasonry,  conservative,
and  the  more  intelligent  are  generally  most  so ;  but  that  conservatism  which
does  not  admit  of  any  development  of  Masonic  principles,  which  is  opposed  to
all  elucidation  of  our  mystic  symbols,  the  promulgation  of  Masonic  teachings,
the  philosophy,  the  history,  the  statistics  of  Masonry,  its  aim  and  its  mission,  is
as  opposite  to  true  Freemasonry  as  virtue  and  vice,  as  light  and  darkness  are
opposed  to  each  other.

--- Sayfa 203 ---
MAINE.
GRAND    LODGE.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  Maine  was  organized  June  1st,  5820.  Its  Annual
Communications  are  held  in  the  City  of  Portland,  commencing  on  the  first
Tuesday  in  May.  The  Grand  Lodge  consists  of  the  Grand  Officers  and  the
Masters  and  Wardens  of  its  constituent  Lodges.  The  revenue  of  the  Grand
Lodge  is  derived  from  the  following  sources  : —
For  Dispensation  for  a  new  Lodge                 .        .        .  $25  00
For  Charter,  in  addition    ...                 .        .  30  00
For  every  Initiation    2  00
For  every  member,  (Grand  Lodge  dues)    ...  0  12£
There  are  99  Lodges  in  this  jurisdiction,  3  of  which  are  under  dispensation.
The  number  of  members,  as  per  last  returns,  was  4319.  The  number  Initiated
during  the  year,  817 ;  Suspended,  31 ;  Expelled,  11 ;  Died,  47.
The  receipts  of  the  Grand  Lodge  for  the  year  ending  May  1st,  5860,  as  per
report  of  Grand  Treasurer,  $2750  75.    Amount  disbursed,  $2411  29.
The  Officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  for  the  present  Masonic  year  are : —
Josiah  H.  Drummond,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
Wm.  P.  Preble,  B.  W.  Dep.  Grand  Master.
John  J.  Bell,  W.  Senior  Grand  Warden.
Joseph  Covell,  W.  Junior  Grand  Warden.
Moses  Dodge,  W.  Grand  Treasurer.
Ira  Berrt,  W.  Grand  Secretary.
Daniel  C  Stanwood,  B.  W.  Corresponding  Grand  Secretary.
Bev.  Cyril  Pearl,  W.  Grand  Chaplain.
J.  D.  Warren,  W.  Grand  Marshal.
J.  I.  Stevens,  W.  Senior  Grand  Deacon.
Alden  D.  Chase,  W.  Junior  Grand  Deacon.
David  Bugbee,
■  Grand  Stewards.
C.  Frederick  King,
T.  S.  Foster,
F.  Williams,
J.  A.  Hall,  Grand  Sword  Bearer.
Silas  Alden,  Grand  Standard  Bearer.
Lewis  B.  Weeks,       )
Jefferson  Moulton,  (
Grand  P<"suivants.
John  Dain,  Grand  Tyler.
(191)

--- Sayfa 204 ---
192
WORLD'S   MASONIC  REGISTER.
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.
No.       Lodge.
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
Master.
1  Portland,
Portland.
2d  Wednesday.
S.  Kyle.
2  Warren,
East  Machais.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m .  F.  L.  Talbot.
3  Lincoln,
Wiscasset.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
D.  K.  Kennedy.
5  Kennebec,
Hallowell.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
T.  W.  Newman.
6  Amity,
Camden.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
J.  Glover.
7  Eastern,
Eastport.
1st  Monday.
R.  B.  Clark.
8  United,
Brunswick.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m. J.  C.  Humphreys.
9  Saco,
Saco.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
A.  Hobson.
10  Rising  Virtue,
Bangor.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m. D.  Bugbee.
12  Cumberland,
New  Gloucester.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m. G.  W.  Plummer.
13  Oriental,
Bridgeton.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m. J.  Chaplin.
14  Solar,
Bath.
1st  Thursday.
A.  C.  Hewey.
15  Orient,
Thomaston.
Every  Tuesday.
0.  J.  Fernald.
16  St.  George,
Warren.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m. J.  C.  Crawford.
17  Anc't  Landmark :,  Portland.
1st  Wednesday.
W.  Phillips.
18  Oxford,
Norway.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
S.  Cobb,  Jr.
19  Felicity,
Bucksport.
Every  Monday.
A.  White.
20  Maine,
Farmington.
Monday  of  f.  m.
J.  H.  Willard.
21  Oriental  Star,
Livermore.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
G.  Ellis.
22  York,
Kennebunk.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
S.  Perkins.
23  Freeport,
Freeport.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m. S.  Thing.
24  Phoenix,
Belfast.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m. H.  F.  Jones.
25  Temple,
Winthrop.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
D.  Cargill.
26  Village,
Bowdoinham.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m. A.  H.  Cheney.
27  Adoniram,
Limington.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m. H.  P.  Waldron.
28  Northern  Star,
North  Anson.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
A.  Moore.
29  Tranquil,
Danville.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
S.  H.  Wilson.
30  Blazing  Star,
Rumford  Centre.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
I.  A.  Putnam.
31  Union,
Union.
Every  Thursday.
J.  H.  Shepard.
32  Hermon,
Gardiner.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m. E.  A.  Chadwick.
33  Waterville,
Waterville.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m. E.  G.  Meader.
34  Somerset,
Skowhegan.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m. H.  A.  Wyman.
35  Bethlehem,
Augusta.
1st  Tuesday.
D.  C.  Stauwood.
36  Casco,
Yarmouth.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m. N.  Drinkwater.
37  Washington,
Lubec.
1st  Wednesday.
C.  W.  Ring.
38  Harmony,
Gorham.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
J.  I.  Stevens.
39  Penobscot,
Dexter.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
I.  M.  Russ.
40  Lygonia,
Ellsworth.
1st  Wednesday.
B.  F.  Thomas.  •
42  Freedom,
Limerick.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
L.  Staples.
43  Alna,
Damariscotta.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
J.  A.  Hall.
44  Piscataquis,
Milo.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
J.  S.  Sampson.
45  Central,
China.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
G.  A.  Lander.
46  St.  Croix,
Calais.
Monday  b.  f.  m.
F.  Williams.
47  Dunlap,
Biddeford.
1st  Monday.
T.  Quinby.
48  Lafayette,
Readfield.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
E.  0.  Bean.
49  MeridianSplendi jrNewport.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
H.  P.  Nasson.

--- Sayfa 205 ---
MAINE.
193
No.       Lodge.
L00ATION.
Time  op  Meeting.
Master.
50  Aurora,
Rockland.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m. S.  Bryant.
51  St.  John's,
South  Berwick.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m. G.  H.  Wakefield.
52  Mosaic,
Dover.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
E.  B.  Averill.
54  Vassalboro',
Vassalboro'.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m. J.  E.  Wing.
55  Fraternal,
Alfred.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
J.  Moulton.
56  Mount  Moriah, Denmark.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
J.  B.  Watson.
58  Unity,
Freedom.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
J.  Weed.
59  Mount  Hope,
Hope.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
J.  B.  Robbins.
60  Star  in  the  East,  Old  Town.
Monday  b.  f.  m.
E.  Hoskins.
61  King  Solomon's i,Waldoboro'.
Friday  b.  f.  m.
A.  F.  Miller.
62  King  David's,
Lincolnville.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m. S.  C.  Hale.
63  Richmond,
Richmond.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m. D.W.C  Chamberlain.
64  Pacific,
Exeter.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
N.  E.  Brown. .
65  Mystic,
Hampden.
3d  Tuesday.
J.  H.  Stuart.
66  Mechanic,
Orono.
Wed.  on  or  bef.  f.  m ,  P.  Vinall.
67  Blue  Mountain. ,  Phillips.
Wednesdays  of  f.  m. H.  0.  Butterfield.
68  Mariner,
Searsport.
Tu.  on  or  bef.  f.  m. C.  H.  Whitney.
69  Howard,
Frankfort.
Friday  before  f.  m.
0.  C.  Couillard.
70  Standish,
Standish.
Thur.  on  or  b.  f.  m. B.  Paine.
71  Rising  Sun,
Orland.
1st  Tuesday.
A.  B.  Spurling.
72  Pioneer,
Number  Eleven.
Sat.  on  or  bef.  f.  m. W.  A.  Thurston.
73  Tyrian,
Minot.
Thur.  on  or  b.  f.  m. A.  Golderman.
74  Bristol,
Bristol.
Monday  before  f.  m .  A.  C.  Hurton.
75  Plymouth,
Plymouth.
Tues.  on  or  bef.  f.  m .  W.  Gray,  Jr.
76  Arundel,
Kennebunkport.
Tues.  on  or  bef.  f.  m .  H.  H.  Chadbourne.
77  Tremont,
Tremont.
Thur.  on  or  b.  f.  m. A.  Tarr.
78  Crescent,
Pembroke.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
B.  Atkinson.
79  Rockland,
Rockland.
Tuesday  before  f.  m .  T.  K.  Osgood.
80  Keystone,
Solon.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
H.  W.  Chaney.
81  Atlantic,
Portland.
3d  Wednesday.
F.  Fox.
82  St.  Paul's,
Rockport.
Monday  before  f.  m .  W.  H.  Washburn.
83  St.  Andrew's,
Bangor.
Fri.  on  or  bef.  f.  m. A.  B.  Marston.
84  Eureka,
St.  George's.
Thursday  evenings. N.  Batchelder.
85  Star  in  the  West,  Unity.
Tues.  on  or  bef.  f.  m .  C.  Taylor.
86  Temple,
Saccarappa.
Tuesday  of  full  m.
D.  W.  Babb.
87  Benevolent,
Carmel.
Wednesday  of  f.  m. A.  M.  Sylvester.
88  Narraguagus,
Cherryfield.
Tues.  on  or  bef.  f.  m .  J.  A.  Milliken.
89  Island,
Islesboro'.
Saturday  bef.  f.  m.
J.  P.  Farrow.
90  Hiram  Abiff,
West  Appleton.
Saturday  bef.  f.  m.
A.  Gowen.
91  Harwood,
Machias.
Monday  evenings.
J.  W.  Murray.
92  Siloam,
Kendall's  Mills,
Thur.  on  or  b.  f.  m. G.  W.  Witherell.
93  Horeb,
Lincoln  Centre.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m. T.  Goodale.
94  Paris,
South  Paris.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m. L.  B.  Weeks.
95  Pond,
Hartland.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
J.  0.  Tracy.
96  Monument,
Houlton.
2d  Wednesday.
C.  P.  Tenny.
97  Bethel,
Bethel.
Saturday  of  full  m. W.  B.  Foster.
98  Katahdin,
Patten.
Thursday  after  f.  m .  I.  D.  Fish.
99  Vernon  Valley. ,  Mount  Vernon.
Tues.  on  or  bef.  f.  m .  M.  S.  Mayhew.
100  Jefferson,
Bryant's  Pond.
.  J.  B.  Currier.

--- Sayfa 206 ---
194
No.       Lodge.
world's
Location.
MASONIC  REGISTER.
Time -or  Meeting.
Master.
Turner.
Dresden.
Brooks.
China,
Lewiston.
G.  W.  Turner.
H.  G.  Allen.
U.  D.  Marsh  River,
U.D.  Dirigo,
U.  D.  Ashlar,
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
E.  Lane.
Jas.  P.  Jones.
Jos.  Pearson  Gill.
GRAND  CHAPTER.
The  Grand  Chapter  of  Maine  was  organized  between  the  years  5819  and
5826,  and  is  subordinate  to  the  General  Grand  Chapter.  It  has  11  subordinate
Chapters  under  its  jurisdiction,  the  total  of  whose  membership,  as  per  last
report,  was  584.  The  returns  show  66  Exalted,  7  Deceased,  and  1  Dimitted.
Amount  of  dues  paid,  $231.
SUBORDINATE    CHAPTERS.
Name.
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
Mount  Vernon,
Portland.
3d  Monday.
Montgomery,
Bath.
Wednesday  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Jerusalem,
Hallowell.
Thursday  before  f.  m.
New  Jerusalem,
Wiscasset.
Tuesday  on  or  before  f.  m.
York,
Saco.
2d  Wednesday.
Mount  Moriah,
Bangor.
Thursday  of  or  before  f.  m,
Corinthian,
Belfast.
Monday  after  full  moon.
King  Solomon,
Rockland.
Thursday  after  f.  m.
King  Hiram,
Lewiston.
Friday  on  or  before  f.  m.
Eastern,
Eastport.
First  Thursday.
Eagle,  U.  D.,
Gorham.
Monday  on  or  before  f.  m.
GRAND  COUNCIL.
Organized  5855.
The  Grand  Council  of  Maine  holds  its  Annual  Convocations  in  the  City  of
Portland,  on  the  first  "Wednesday  of  May.  It  has  7  subordinate  Councils  under
its  jurisdiction,  the  total  of  whose  membership,  as  per  returns  in  May,  5860,
was  153,  8  Promotions  and  4  Deaths  during  the  year.
SUBORDINATE  COUNCILS.
No.  Name.  Location.
1  King  Solomon's,  Belfast.
2  Mount  Vernon,  Brunswick.
3  Alpha,  Gardiner.
4  Bangor,  Bangor.
No.       Name.  Location.
5  Portland,  Portland.
6  King  Hiram,  Rockland.
7  Maine,  Saco.
GRAND  COMMANDERY.
The  Grand  Commandery  of  Maine  was  organized  May  5, 1852.  It  has  4  sub-
ordinate Commanderies  under  its  jurisdiction.  The  total  number  of  members,
as  per  last  report,  in  May,  1860,  was  150.  Amount  of  dues  paid,  $57.  Orders
conferred,  19.

--- Sayfa 207 ---
MAINE.  195
SUBORDINATE  COMMANDERIES.
No.
Name.
Location.
1 Maine,
Gardiner.
2 Portland,
Portland.
ro.       Name.
Location.
3     St.  John's,
Bangor
4    Bradford,
Saco.
SUBSCRIBERS'  NAMES.
ALBION.
Taylor,  Amasa,  Jr.,  Farmer.     P.  M.,  Central,  45.
AUGUSTA.
Austin,  S.  E.,  Merchant  Tailor.    Bethlehem,  35.
Barrows,  Benj.  P.,  Printer.    Bethlehem,  35.
Chaoe,  John  W.,  Dealer  in  Furnaces,  Stoves,  and  Tinware.    Bethlehem,  35.
Cobb,  Wm.  A.,  Clothing.    Bethlehem,  35.
Coller,  Charles  E.,  Manufacturer  of  Harness,  and  Trimmer.  Star  in  the
West,  85.
Gilbreth,  B.  H.,  High  Sheriff  Kennebec  co.     J.  D.,  Bethlehem,  35.
Goodrich,  S.  S.,  Blacksmith.    Bethlehem,  35.
Hall,  Joseph  B.,  Editor,  Maysville,  Aroostook,  Maine.     Bethlehem,  35.
Joseph,  W.,  Dry  Goods.     S.  W.,  Bethlehem,  35.
Moody,  Samuel,  Machinist.    J.  W.,  Bethlehem,  35.
Prentice,  James  Howard,  Clerk,  W.  I.  Goods,  etc.  Bethlehem,  35  ;  S.,  Alpha
coun.,  3  ;  Jerusalem  chap. ;  Maine  com.,  1.
Pullen,  Cyrenius,  Marble  Manufacturer.     Bethlehem,  35.
Robinson,  B.  C,  Wholesale  Flour  and  Corn.    Bethlehem,  35.
Russell,  Ira  K.,  Machinist.     Bethlehem,  35.
Scoles,  John,  Miller.     Bethlehem,  35.
Souther,  Joseph  N.,  Bookseller.  Bethlehem,  35 ;  Jerusalem  chap. ;  Maine
com.,  1.
Staples,  Henry  G.,  Wholesale  and  Retail  Dealer  in  W.  I.  Goods  and  Gro-
ceries.   Bethlehem,  35.
Thorn,  E.  B.,  Butcher.    Bethlehem,  35.
Turner,  Otis  G.    Bethlehem,  35.
BABTGOK.
Brooks,  John  H.,  Locomotive  Engineer.     St.  Andrew's,  83.
BATH.
Alexander,  L.  S.,  W.  I.  Goods  and  Groceries.  Nevada,  13,  Cal. ;  Mont-
gomery chap.
Blanchard,  Davis,  Second  Depot  Master.     Richmond,  63.
Hewey,  A.  C,  Clerk  of  S.  J.  Courts,  Sagadahoc  county.    Solar,  14.

--- Sayfa 208 ---
196  world's  masonic  register.
BELFAST.
Chase,  George  S.,  Iron  Moulder.    S.  W.,  Phoenix,  24.
Hodges,  Wm.  H.,  Eegister  of  Deeds.    Phoenix,  24.
Philips,  Theo.  N.     Phoenix,  24.
Stuart,  H.  M.,  Dentist.    J.  D.,  Phoenix,  24 ;  E.  A.  C,  Corinthian  chap.
Wright,  Geo.  B.     Phoenix,  24.
BELGBADE.
Crooker,  A.  P.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.    Master  Mason.
Damon,  Thomas  W.,  Carriage  and  Ornamental  Painter.    Master  Mason.
Mosher,  J.  C,  Section  Master  on  the  And.  and  Kennebec  B.  Eoad.    Master
Mason.
Springer,  W.  W.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.     Master  Mason.
Weston,  L.  B.,  Justice  of  Peace  and  the  Quorum.    Master  Mason.
BIDDEFOBD.
Shaw,  Charles  A.,  Broker.    Dunlap,  47.
Stevens,  E.  G.,  Physician  and  Druggist.     Dunlap,  47.
Walker,  Geo.  N.,  Moulder  in  Iron.     Dunlap,  47.
BLOOMEIELD.
Gould,  W.  M.,  (firm  S.  S.  Gould  &  Co.,)  Millwrights.     Somerset,  34.
Lyon,  E.  E.,  Paper  Manufacturer.     Somerset,  34.
DENMAEK.
Sawyers,  L.  P.,  M.D.    P.  M.,  Mount  Moriah,  56.
FBANKFOBT.
Mayo,  A.  B.,  Clerk.     Secretary,  Howard,  69.
GABDIBTEK.
Bailey,  Augustus,  Carriage  Manufacturer.     Herman,  32.
Bailey,  S.  E.,  Carriage  Manufacturer,  East  Pittston.     Herman,  32.
Colson,  J.  U.,  City  Marshal.    Herman,  32.
Flynt,  John  H.,  Merchant  Tailor,  70  Water  Street.     Herman,  32.
Hildreth,  Thaddeus,  M.D.  and  Surgeon.     Herman,  32.
Holmes,  George  M.,  Iron  Founder  and  Machinist.     Herman,  32.
Larrabee,  Daniel,  Ship-builder  and  Parmer.  Jerusalem  chap.,  and  Eecorder,
Maine  com.,  1.
Littlefield,  E.  K.,  (firm  Littlefield  &  Shaw,)  Agents  and  Manufacturers  of  the
Blake  Water  Wheel,  Mill  Work ;  also  Sawing  and  Planing.    Herman,  32.
Marble,  M.  P.,  M.D.  and  Surgeon.    J.  W.,  Maine  com.,  1.
Maxey,  E.  S.,  Dealer  in  Flour,  W.  I.  Goods  and  Groceries.     Herman,  32.
Neal,  B.  A.,  Trader.    Herman,  32.
Plaisted;  F.  A.,  Stone-ware  Manufacturer.    Herman,  32.
Sargent,  William,  Dealer  and  Manufacturer  of  Long  and  Short  Lumber.
Herman,  32.
Stoddard,  James  L.,  Stone-ware.    Herman,  32.

--- Sayfa 209 ---
MAINE.  197
Townsend,  S.  W.,  Manufacturer  of  all  kinds  ot  Lumber.    Herman,  32.
Wahlgren,  Olf  G.,  Stone- ware.    Herman,  32.
Whitmore,  C.  W.,  M.D.  and  Surgeon.  Jerusalem  chap.  Treas.,  Maine  com.,  1.
Wiles,  W.  H.,  Stone-ware.    Herman,  32.
HALLO  WELL.
Brann,  Joseph  E.,  Wood-worker  in  Machinery  Cotton  Manufactory.  S.  D.,
Kennebec,  5.
Hall,  George  W.,  Overseer  Weaving  Department  Cotton  Manufactory.  J.  D.,
Kennebec,  5.
Horn,  Eben,  Tanner  and  Wool  Dealer.  Kennebec,  5 ;  C.  G.,  Jerusalem
chap. ;  Alpha  coun. ;  Maine  com.,  1.
King,  James  G.,  Overseer  Dressing  Department  Cotton  Manufactory.  Ken-
nebec, 5.
Lowell,  J.  H.,  W.  I.  Goods  and  Groceries.    Kennebec,  5.
Newman,  Thomas  W.,  Postmaster.    W.  M.,  Kennebec,  5.
Sanborn,  J.  M.,  Blacksmith.    J.  W.,  Kennebec,  5.
KENDALL'S  MILLS.
Black,  Franklin  H.,  Manufacturer  of  Doors,  Sashes,  and  Blinds.     Siloam,  92.
Brown,  George  0.,  Parmer.     S.  D.,  Siloam,  92.
Connor,  Simon,  Dealer  in  Lumber.    Secy.,  Siloam,  92.
Pogg,  Henry,  Dealer  in  Lumber.     Siloam,  92.
Hall,  Bobert  B.,  Dealer  in  Lumber.     Siloam,  92.
Leavitt,  J.  P.,  Boad  Master,  S.  and  K.  R.  B.     Siloam,  92.
Pratt,  E.  G.,  Dry  Goods  and  Groceries.     Siloam,  92.
Totman,  Calvin  G.,  Dealer  in  Lumber.     Steward,  Siloam,  92.
Witherell,  George  M.,  Boom  Proprietor.     W.  M.,  Siloam,  92.
Woodworth,  George,  Station  Agent  S.  and  K.  B.  B.    J.  D.,  Siloam,  92.
LEWISTON.
Andrews,  Alonzo,  Engineer.  Tranquil,  29  ;  P.  H.  P.,  King  Hiram  chap. ;
P.  T.  I.  G.  Master  of  Portland  coun. ;  Perfect  and  Sublime  Mason ;  Sovereign
Prince  of  Boyal  Secret ;  De  Molay  encpt.,  Mass.
Butler,  Manley  0.,  Merchant.     Tranquil,  29.
Cook,  John  G.,  Druggist.     Tranquil,  29 ;  King  Hiram  chap.
Fessenden,  Thomas  A.  D.,  Counsellor- at  Law.  Tranquil,  29;  King  Hiram
chap.
Libby,  Thurston,  Millwright.     Tranquil,  29  ;  King  of  King  Hiram  chap.
LIWCOLTTVTLLE.
Crehore,  Henry,  Tanner.     Sec,  King  David's,  62.
Miller,  George  Y.    King  David's,  62.
Pendleton,  W.  A.,  Clerk.    J.  D.,  King  David's,  62  ;  Corinthian  chap.,  Belfast.
MOUNT  VEEKTOKT.
Leighton,  M.  B.,  Farmer.     Sec,  Vernon  Valley  Lodge,  U.  D.
Mayhew,  M.  S.,  Merchant.     W.  M.,  Vernon  Valley  Lodge,  U.  D.
Small,  Abner,  Postmaster.    S.  W.,  Vernon  Valley  Lodge,  U.  D. ;  Jerusalem
chap.

--- Sayfa 210 ---
198  world's  masonic  register.
Richardson,  Prauk,  Tailor.    Vernon  Valley  Lodge,  U.  D.
"Wood,  T.  J.,  Miller.    J.  D.,  Vernon  Valley  Lodge,  U.  D.
PHILLIPS,  Franklin  County.
Butterfield,  H.  0.,  Attorney  at  Law  and  Trial  Justice.     W.  M.,  Blue  Mount-
ain, 67  ;  Mt.  Moriah  chap.,  6.
Harden,  Dennison,  House  Carpenter.    S.  D.,  Blue  Mountain,  67.
Plaisted,  E.  P.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.     J.  W.,  Blue  Mountain,  67.
Teague,  A.  V.,  Harness-maker.     S.  W.,  Blue  Mountain,  67  ;  Jerusalem  chap.,
4  :  Alpha  coun.,  3.
PORTLAND.
Averill,  David,  Livery  Stable  Keeper.  Ancient  Mark  Lodge ;  Mount  Vernon
chap. ;  Portland  com.,  2.
Berry,  Ira.  Grand  Secretary  of  Grand  Lodge,  Grand  Chapter,  and  Grand
Council,  and  Grand  Eecorder  of  Grand  Commandery,  Secretary  Ancient  Land-
mark Lodge,  Secretary  Mount  Vernon  chap.,  B.  111.  Dep.  G.  M.  Portland  coun.,
P.  S.  W.,  Portland  com.,  2.
Smith,  Charles  B.,  Druggist.  P.  M.,  Oriental  and  Ancient  Mark  Lodges  ;
P.  H.  P.,  Mount  Vernon  chap. ;  P.  G.  C,  Maine  and  Portland  corn's. ;  P.  G.
Master  of  Grand  com.;  P.  G.  Sec.  of  Grand  Lodge;  P.  Grand  Recorder  of
Grand  coun.
Stinson,  A.  P.,  Merchant.  Ancient  Mark  Lodge ;  Mount  Vernon  chap. ;
P.  111.  G.  M.,  Portland  coun. ;  P.  Capt.  Gen.,  Portland  com.
RICHMOND.
Clark,  Daniel,  Jr.,  Merchant  Tailor  and  Beady-made  Clothing.    J.  W.,  Rich-
mond, 63.
Southard,  J.  A.,  Postmaster.     S.  W.,  Richmond,  63.
READEIELD.
Bachelder,  J.  R.,  Farmer.     Lafayette,  48.
Bean,  Emery  0.,  Counselor  and  Attorney  at  Law.     W.  M.,  Lafayette,  48.
Coolidge,  G.  A.,  Farmer.    Lafayette,  48.
Gile,  Asa,  Counselor  and  Attorney  at  Law.     S.  W.,  Lafayette,  48.
Morse,  C.  S.,  Carriage  and  Ornamental  Painter.     J.  D.,  Lafayette,  48.
Whittier,  Cyrus  B.,  Clothing  and  Hardware.     S.  D.,  Lafayette,  48.
SKOWHEGAN.
Brewster,  S.  B.,  Skowhegan  Hotel.     Moriah,  15,  Connt.
Emery,  Asa  S.,  Merchant.     Somerset,  34.
Sevens,  Francis  A.,  Hair  Dresser.     Somerset,  34.
Steward,  Benjamin,  Clocks,  Watches,  and  Jewelry.     Somerset,  34.
SEARSPORT.
Pendleton,  John,  Sailor.     Mariner,  68.
STOCTON.
Bates,  Geo.  E.,  Sail-maker.     Mariner,  68.
WATERVILLE.
Allen,  J.  T.,  Dealer  in  Flour,  Corn,  and  Groceries.    Waterville,  33.
Bartlett,  J.  C,  Eastern  Express  Co.     J.  W.,  Waterville,  33.

--- Sayfa 211 ---
MAINE.-  199
Boothby,  Johnson,  Locomotive  Engineer.     Waterville,  33.
Crooker,  J.  M.,  Clock  and  Watch  Maker.     Waterville,  33.
Drummond,  Josiah.     Waterville,  33 ;  King,  Jerusalem  chap.
Hubbard,  John  U.,  Scythe  and  Axe' Manufacturer,  West  Waterville.     Water-
ville, 33.
Maxwell,  Wm.  L.,  Boots  and  Shoes.    Waterville,  33.
Merrifield,  Geo.  A.  L.,  Clerk,  Boots  and  Shoes.     Waterville,  33.
Morse,  C.  M.,  Clerk  Androscoggin  and  Ken.  R.  R.     P.  M.,  Waterville,  33.
Peavy,  L.  H.,  firm  of  J.  Peavy  &  Bros.,  Dealers  in  Clothing.    Waterville,  33.
Prescott,  S.  H.,  Tinplate  Worker.     Waterville,  33.
Robinson,  Geo.  L.,  Clerk,  Hardware  and  Iron.    Waterville,  33.
WTNTHBOP.
Balentino,  Samuel,  Foreman  Iron  Poundery.     S.  D.,  Temple,  25.
Ballard,  Ephraim,  Keeper  of  Winthrop  Hotel.  Bethlehem,  35 ;  Jerusalem
chap.
Bradford,  P.  C,  Druggist  and  Apothecary.     Temple,  25.
Cargill,  David,  House  Carpenter,  East  Winthrop.     W.  M.,  Temple,  25.
Clark,  E.  M.,  Currier.     Temple,  25.
Cochran,  Ohas.  A.,  Horn.  Physician  and  Surgeon.     Secretary,  Temple,  25.
Gammon,  Stephen,  Farmer.     J.  W.,  Temple,  25.
Holden,  Silvanns,  Cotton  Manufacturer.     Temple,  25.
Morrill,  Geo.  S.,  Dry  Goods  and  Groceries.     Temple,  25.
Morton,  E.  P.,  Manufacturer  and  Dealer  in  Boots,  Shoes,  Hats,  and  Caps.
Temple,  25.
Rounels,  J.  G.,  Dry  Goods  and  Groceries.     Temple,  25.
Stanley,  David,  Banker.     Temple,  25.
Stanley,  Sumner  H.,  Carriage  Manufacturer.     S.  W.,  Temple,  25.
WISCASSET.
Clark,  Henry,  Merchant.    Lincoln,  3  ;  King,  New  Jerusalem  chap.,  3.
Haraden,  Calvin  R.,  Register  of  Deeds.     Lincoln,  3  ;  New  Jerusalem  chap.,  3.
Haraden,  Charles  M.,  Clerk.     Lincoln,  3.
Johnson,  T.  B.,  Merchant.  Lincoln,  3 ;  New  Jerusalem  chap.,  3 ;  Maine
com.,  1.
Kennedy,  D.  K.,  Physician.  W.  M.,  Lincoln,  3 ;  New  Jerusalem  chap.,  3 ;
Maine  com.,  1.
Topham,  John,  Sail-maker.     S.  D.,  Lincoln,  3.
TAHMOUTH.
Baker,  Jeremiah,  Accountant.     Casco,  36.
Blanchard,  Silvanus,  Shipmaster.     Casco,  36.
Curtis,  Joseph,  Shipmaster.     Casco,  36.
Davis,  Edward,  Stove  Dealer.     Casco,  36.
Gooding,  Samuel,  Master  Caulker.     J.  W.,  Casco,  36.
Kinsley,  Cyrus,  Expressman.     Casco,  36.
Lane,  Sidney  H.,  Telegraph  Operator.     Casco,  36.
Plimton,  Nathan,  Merchant,  North  Yarmouth.    Atlantic,  81.
Storer,  Ammi,  Merchant.    Casco,  36.

--- Sayfa 212 ---
MAEYLAND.
GRAND  LODGE.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  Maryland  wag  organized  April  17,  5787.  The  Annual
Communication  of  the  Grand  Lodge  is  held  in  the  City  of  Baltimore,  on  the
third  Monday  in  November ;  and  also  meets  semi-annually,  at  the  same  place,
on  the  second  Monday  in  May.  The  Grand  Lodge  consists  of  the  elected  Grand
Officers,  Past  Grand  and  Past  Deputy  Grand  Masters,  Past  Grand  Wardens,
Past  Grand  Secretaries,  and  Past  Grand  Treasurers,  Past  Masters,  and  Masters
and  Wardens  of  its  constituent  Lodges.  The  revenue  of  the  Grand  Lodge  is
derived  from  the  following  sources  : —
For  Dispensation  for  new  Lodges         ....  $10  00
Por  Charters,  in  addition
   40  00
For  every  Initiation    2  00
For  each  Diploma    1  50
There  are  38  warranted  Lodges  and  1  under  dispensation.  The  returns  of  38
Lodges  show  the  total  number  of  Master  Masons,  2028 ;  Fellow  Crafts,  34 ;
Entered  Apprentices,  73 ;  Withdrawn,  46 ;  Dropped,  31 ;  Died,  12  ;  Suspended,
2  ;  Dismissed,  9.  The  receipts  of  the  Grand  Lodge  for  dues,  rent,  and  gas  from
35  Lodges,  $1630.  The  Charity  Fund  of  the  Grand  Lodge  amounts  to
$30,343  13.
The  Officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Maryland  for  the  present  Masonic  year,
holding  over,  are  : —
Anthony  Kimmel,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
John  Coates,  R.  W.  Deputy  Grand  Master.
John  L.  Yeates,  R.  W.  Senior  Grand  Warden.
S.  M.  Hallek,  R.  W.  Junior  Grand  Warden.
Joseph  Robinson,  R.  W.  Grand  Secretary.
Frederick  Fiokey,  Jr.,  R.  W.  Grand  Treasurer.
Rev.  J.  N.  McJilton,  D.D.,  R.  W.  Grand  Chaplain.
Nicholas  Brewer,  R.  W.  Grand  Marshal.
James  McDougal,  W.  Grand  Standard  Bearer.
James  Webb,  W.  Grand  Sword  Bearer.
Jno.  S.  Chappell,  W.  Senior  Grand  Deacon.
William  Rogers,  W.  Junior  Grand  Deacon.
James  Stirrat,  W.  Senior  Grand  Steward.
George  M.  Lamb,  W.  Junior  Grand  Steward.
Lewis  A.  Thomas,  Grand  Pursuivant.
James  M.  Anderson,  Grand  Director  of  Ceremonies.
David  Martin,  Grand  Tyler.
(200)

--- Sayfa 213 ---
MARYLAND.
201
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.
NO.
Time  op  Meeting.
Master.
3  Washington,  Baltimore,
13  Concordia,  Baltimore.
25  Amicable,  Baltimore.
34  St.  John's,        Baltimore.
44  Mount  Ararat,  Bel  Air.
45  Cassia,
48  Union,
51  Warren,
53  Harmony,
58  Columbia,
60  Union,
66  Cambridge,
68  King  David's,
70  Patmos,
84  Friendship,
87  Burns,
88  Adherence,
89  Annapolis,
91  Wicomico,
92  Pocomoke,
93  Corinthian,
Baltimore.
Elkton.
Baltimore.
Port  Deposit.
Frederick.
Baltimore.
Cambridge.
Baltimore.
Ellicott's  Mills.
Hagerstown.
Trappe.
Baltimore.
Annapolis.
Salisbury.
Snow  Hill.
Baltimore.
94  Geo.  Wash'ton,  Westminster.
95  Nottingham,      Nottingham.
96  Monumental,
97  Ben  Franklin,
98  Eureka,
99  Mountain,
100  Potomac,
101  Howard,
102  Coates,
103  Hiram,
104  Lebanon,
105  Eureka,
106  Manokin,
107  Hiram,
108  Centre,
Baltimore.
Baltimore.
Millington.
Frostburg.
Cumberland.
Elk  Ridge  Landing.
Easton.
Westernport.
Manchester.
Sharpsburg.
Princess  Anne.
Baltimore.
Baltimore.
109  Mystic  Circle,  Baltimore.
110  Arcana,  Baltimore.
U.  D.  Lafayette,         Baltimore.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
2d  &  4th  Weds.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
2d  Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
2d  &  4th  Thursdays.
2d  Monday.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
Every  Wednesday.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
Every  Monday.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Thursdays.
1st  Friday.
Every  Monday.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Every  Tuesday.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
1st,  3d,  &  5th  Mon.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
Chas.  Goodwin.
Wm.  Rogers.
Jas.  M.  Jacobs.
L.  E.  Slicer.
Dr.  E.  H.  Richardson.
Wm.  J.  Wroth.
Dr.  L.  R.  Kirk.
Justus  C.  Gude.
L.  A.  C.  Gerry.
M.  Bromett.
L.  R.  Keizer.
H.  G.  Grieves.
G.  H.  Hewitt.
L.  Macklin.
T.  G.  Robertson.
Dr.  J.  L.  Chaplain.
J.  H.  Medairy.
B.  B.  Brewer.
Rev.  A.  Wallace.
T.  F.  Stevenson.
W.  S.  Spedden.
J.  M.  Yingling.
J.  M.  S.  Maccubbin.
G.  Loud.
G.  T.  Clark.
R.  M.  Smythe.
F.  A.  Mason.
C.  H.  Ohr.
M.  McCauley.
J.  F.  Ehlen.
Wm.  N.  Nace.
D.  Pennell.
L.  Woolford.
J.  D.  McCabe,  D.D.
A.  S.  Walton.
Wm.  B.  Larmour.
R.  Gwynn.
C.  C.  Adreon.
GRAND  CHAPTER.
The  Grand  Chapter  of  Maryland  and  District  of  Columbia,  which  ought  pro-
perly to  have  been  arranged  under  Maryland,  we  have  placed  under  District  of
Columbia,  see  page  113.

--- Sayfa 214 ---
202  world's  masonic  register.
COMMANDERIES.
There  are  two  Commanderies  in  Maryland,  both  located  in  Baltimore.  The
first,  Maryland  Commandery,  No.  1,  received  its  charter  from  the  Grand  En-
campment of  Pennsylvania,  and  was  recognized  by  the  General  Grand  Encamp-
ment in  1832.  At  the  Triennial  meeting  of  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the
U.  S.,  in  1859,  it  reported  51  members.  The  other,  Baltimore  Commandery,
No.  2,  received  a  dispensation  June  17,  1859,  and  returned  24  members  at  the
Triemmial  session  of  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the  U.  S.,  and  was  granted  a
charter.
SUBSCRIBERS'  NAMES.
BALTIMORE.
Achey,  Charles  P.,  Leather  Dealer,  22  S.  Liberty.     Ben  Franklin,  97.
Bailey,  T.  S.,  Salesman,  156  W.  Lombard.     Washington,  3.
Bartholon,  A.  J.,  Carpenter,  48  Pine.     St.  John's,  34.
Bell,  Henry,  1  Bible  House.     Warren,  51;  Phoenix  chap.,  7.
Benson,  John  P.,  Dealer  in  Paints,  Oils,  etc.,  170  Franklin.  Treas.,  Centre,
108 ;  Phoenix  chap.,  7  ;  S.  B.,  Baltimore  com.,  2.
Berger,  John,  Bookseller  and  Stationer,  252  W.  Baltimore.  P.  M.,  Concordia.
13;  Phoenix  chap..  7  ;  Treas.,  Baltimore  com.,  2.
Blair,  L.  P.,  Gas  Fitting  and  Fixtures,  366  W.  Baltimore.    Arcana,  110.
Blensinger,  Geo.  F.,  Carpenter,  145  Boss.     Centre,  108.
Bosley,  N.  M.,  Hardware  Merchant,  4  Light-street  Wharf.     Centre,  108.
Bourne,  James,  Hatter,  193  W.  Baltimore.  S.  W.,  Centre,  108 ;  Phoenix
chap.,  7  ;  Baltimore  com.,  2.
Bower,  Geo.  W.,  Butcher,  517  W.  Saratoga.     Centre,  108.
Bower,  L.  M.,  Butcher,  494  W.  Saratoga.     Centre,  108.
Bowersox,  T.  K.,  Clerk,  381  AT.  Baltimore.     Centre,  108.
Brown,  Wm.,  Jeweler,  276  W.  Baltimore.     Treas.,  Mystic  Circle,  109.
Campbell,  Wm.,  Flonr  and  Produce  Commission  Merchant,  43  S.  Howard.
P.  S.  G.  W.,  P.  M.,  Cassia,  45  ;  Treas.,  Phoenix  chap.,  7.
Clark,  J.  G.,  Oak  Cooper,  13  Commerce.  P.  M.,  Warren,  51 ;  C.  of  H.,
Phoenix  chap.,  7.
Cooke,  John,  Cotton  Manufacturer,  151  Garden.  Centre,  108  ;  Phoenix  chap.,
7  ;  Baltimore  com.,  2.
Coon,  L.  C,  Cigar  Manufacturer,  377  W.  Pratt.     Warren,  51.
Cox,  Wm.  H.,  Merchant  Tailor,  606  W.  Baltimore.  Arcana,  110.  Phoenix
chap.,  7.
Cushing,  Jr.,  John,  Commission  Merchant,  Provisions,  etc.,  Exchange.
Mystic  Circle,  109  ;  Phoenix  chap.,  7  ;  Baltimore  com.,  2.
Delphy,  George,  Swan  Hotel,  S.  E.  corner  of  Franklin  and  Eutaw  Streets.
Ben  Franklin,  97.
Dieffenbach,  Dr.  F.,  President  and  Proprietor  of  Irving  College,  Manchester,
Md.     S.  W.,  Lebanon,  104.

--- Sayfa 215 ---
MARYLAND.  203
Douglas.  August.    Corinthian,  93  ;  Concordia,  1.
Dushane,  John  A.,  Paper  Dealer,  40  S.  Charles.    Centre,  108.
Bmerick,  Wm.  H.,  Boot  and  Shoe  Manufacturer,  9  N.  Butaw.  Centre,  108  ;
Phoenix  chap.,  7 ;  Baltimore  com.,  2.
Escavaille,  Jos.  B.  G.  Sec'y  of  G.  Lodge  of  I.  0.  O.  F.  of  Maryland,  Odd
Fellows'  Hall,  N.  Gay.    Amicable,  25.
Fickey,  Jr.,  F.,  Importer  of  Fancy  Goods,  250  W.  Baltimore.  P.  M.,  Con-
cordia, 13 ;  Jerusalem  chap.,  9  ;  Baltimore  com.,  2  ;  G.  Treas.  G.  L.  of  Mary-
land ;  G.  Treas.  of  G.  Chap,  of  Maryland  and  District  of  Columbia.
Ford,  "Wm.  H.,  Merchant  Tailor,  31  N.  Howard.    Adherence,  88.
Gibson,  Robert,  Plumber,  7  Butaw  House,  Baltimore  St.    Warren,  51.
Goodwin,  Charles,  President  Merchants'  Bank.  P.  G.  M.  of  Maryland ;  P.
G.  K.  of  Grand  Chapter  of  Maryland  and  District  of  Columbia.
Gootee,  H.  P.,  Broker,  99  Washington.     Centre,  108.
Gude,  Justus  C,  Grocer,  cor.  German  and  Eutaw.  W.  M.,  Warren,  51 ;
Phoenix  chap.,  7.
Harrison,  P.  H.,  Tobacconist,  680  W.  Baltimore.      Lodge,  U.  D.
Hearn,  A.  J.,  Merchant,  225  Lexington.  J.  W.,  Centre,  108  ;  Phoenix  chap.,
7  ;  Baltimore  com.,  2.
Hecht,  S.,  Dry  Goods  Merchant,  cor.  Broadway  and  Canton  Avenue.  King
David's,  68.
Hewitt,  George  H.,  Leather  Dealer,  225  Alice  Ann.  W.  M.,  King  David's,
68 ;  S.,  Phoenix  chap.,  7.
Holmes,  B.  A.,  Super.  Spring  Garden  Gas  Works.  P.  M.,  Warren,  51 ;
Concordia,  chap.,  1 ;  Warder,  Maryland  com.,  1.
Horner,  C.  Wilson,  Wholesale  Confectioner  and  Fruit  Dealer,  301  W.Baltimore.
Ben  Franklin,  97.
Huppman,  N.  A.,  Hardware  Merchant,  307  W.  Baltimore.     Ben  Franklin,  97.
Johnson,  Samuel  M.,  Cumberland  Coal  Operator,  Locust  Point,  res.,  89  Ann
Street.    Warren,  51.
Jones,  John  H.,  Chair  Manufacturer,  1 96  Lexington.     King  David's,  68.
Jordan,  Edward,  Merchant  Tailor  and  Clothier,  157  Broadway.  S.  D.,  King
David's,  68  ;  Phoenix  chap.,  7.
Kalkman,  Henry  T.,  Clerk,  778  W.  Baltimore  St.    St.  John's,  34.
Kemp,  Charles  E.,  Hardware  Merchant,  336  W.  Baltimore.    Arcana,  110.
Kenedy,  W.  W.,  Lumber  Merchant,  130  S.  Charles.  Concordia,  13  ;  Phoenix
chap.,  7  ;  Maryland  com.,  1.
Kenney,  A.  &  F.,  Manufacturing  Jewelers,  Gold  and  Silver  Pens  aDd  Pencil
Cases,  291  W.  Baltimore.    Lodge  72,  Broughgammon,  Antrim  County,  Ireland.
Kloman,  Louis,  Merchant  Tailor,  34  N.  Charles.     King  David's,  68.
Knapp,  F.,  English  and  German  Institute,  19  S.  Gay  St.     King  David's,  68.
Larmour,  W.  B.,  Jeweler,  10  Light.  W.  M.,  Mystic  Circle,  109  ;  Phoenix
chap.,  7.
Lawder,  Samuel  M.,  Attorney  at  Law,  72  W.  Fayette  St.  Secretary,  Ami-
cable, 25.
Leutbecher,  C,  Concert  Kooms,  Washington  Hall.    King  David's,  68.
Long,  L.  J.,  Manufacturer  and  Dealer  in  Cigars,  Tobacco  and  Snuff,  S.  E.
cor.  Pratt  and  Albemarle.    S.  W.,  King  David's,  68.
14

--- Sayfa 216 ---
204  world's  masonic  register.
Mann,  Chas.  H.,  Mann's  Hotel  and  Dining  Booms,  124  W.Baltimore.  P.M.,
Ben  Franklin,  97  ;  Columbia  chap.,  91,  Pa. ;  Baltimore  com.,  2.
Martin,  David,  Grand  Tyler,  169  Saratoga.  Concordia,  13 ;  Phoenix  chap.,
7  ;  Maryland  com.,  1.
Maulsby,  P.  H.,  Salesman,  57  N.  Exeter.     Centre,  108.
Medairy,  J.  H.,  Bookseller,  6  N.  Howard.  P.  S.  G.  W.  and  G.  Lecturer  W.
M.,  Adherence,  88  ;  Phoenix  chap.,  7  ;  Maryland  com.,  1.
Metzger,  Franklin,  Apothecary  and  Druggist,  corner  Gay  and  Exter.  St.
John's,  34.
Miles,  C.  A.,  Bestaurant,  5  Market  Place.     Union,  60.
Moorehead,  John,  Commission  and  Wholesale  Dealer  in  Tobacco,  Cigars,
Snuff,  etc.,  14  N.  Howard.    J.  W.,  Cassia,  45.
O'Laughlin,  S.  W.,  Grocer,  156  and  158  N.  Gay.     Centre,  108.
Overbeck,  A.,  Boot  and  Shoe  Manufacturer,  19  Watson.     King  David's,  68.
Poller,  Henry,  Professor  of  Music,  39  Marion.  King  David's,  68  j  Phoenix
chap.,  7.
Price,  Geo.  M.,  Architect  and  Builder,  369  W.  Fayette.  Concordia,  13 ;  C.
of  H,  Jesusalem  chap.,  9 ;  S.  B.,  Baltimore  com.,  2.
Beign,  D.  M.,  Butcher,  752  Pennsylvania  Avenue.     Centre,  108.
Bobbins,  E.  A.,  Coal  Dealer,  7  Sun  Building.    Arcana,  110.
Bosenthal,  "Wm.,  Watchmaker,  10  Light.    J.  D.,  Mystic  Circle,  109.
Sauerberg,  J.  D.,  Cigar  Manufacturer  and  Dealer  in  Tobacco,  21  Light  St.
Ben  Franklin,  97.
Schiebler,  A.  K.,  Jeweler,  229  W.  Baltimore.     Adherence,  88.
Schloss,  Joseph,  Merchant  Tailor,  19  Light  St.  below  Fountain  Hotel.  Ami-
cable, 25.
Schulz,  A.  H.,  Dealer  in  Groceries,  Liquors,  etc.,  316  Alice  Ann  St.  Con-
cordia, 13.
Sezmons,  W.  H.,  Sail-maker,  7  Trinity.     King  David's,  68.
Sisco,  C.  T.,  Begalia  Manufacturer,  95  W.  Baltimore.     Centre,  108.
Slicer,  L.  E.,  Assistant  City  Commissioner,  64  Washington  St.  S.  W.,  St.
John's,  34.
Small,  Wm.  H.,  Ladies'  Dress  Trimmings,  221  W.  Baltimore.    Centre,  108.
Snead,  John  E.,  Saddle  and  Harness  Manufacturer,  5  and  6  Eutaw  House.
Washington,  3.
Spencer,  Thos.  H,  Harbor  Master,  51  Wolf.    Warren,  51.
Stansbury,  John  E.,  Grocer,  237  N.  Gay.     Centre,  108.
Stewart,  John  D.,  Central  Stables,  111  Lexington.    Warren,  51.
Stirrat,  James,  Merchant,  198  E.  Monument.  P.  S.  G.  D.  and  P.  M.,  Monu-
mental, 96  ;  P.  G.  S.  and  P.  H.  P.,  Jerusalem  chap.,  9  ;  P.  C,  Maryland  com.,
1 ;  E.  C,  Baltimore  com.,  2.
Thompson,  Thomas,  Importer  of  Brandies,  Wines,  etc.,  63  S.  Gay  St.  Centre,
108.
Ulman,  B.  F.,  Importer  of  Brandies  and  Wines,  5  N.  Gay.  Washington,  3;
Concordia  chap.,  1.
Van  Tromp,  John,  Watch  Case  Manufacturer,  11  Light.  P.  M.,  Centre,
108.

--- Sayfa 217 ---
MARYLAND.  205
Volk,  Francis,  Boot  and  Shoe  Manufacturer,  48  S.  Charles.  J.  W.,  King
David's,  68  ;  Phoenix  chap.,  7.
Weitskittel,  A.,  Stove  and  Hollow  Ware  Foundery,  302,  304,  306  and  308
Alice  Ann.    Amicable,  25.
Winchester,  S.  C,  Gentlemen's  Furnishing  Goods-,  157  W.  Baltimore.  Cen-
tre, 108.
Woods,  W.  M.,  Architect  and  Builder,  W.  Lexington  St.  between  Gilmour
and  Mount  Streets.    Arcana,  110.
Young,  James,  Job  Printer,  114  W.  Baltimore.    J.  W.,  St.  John's,  34.
Zuckschwerdt,'  C,  Merchant,  305  W.  Baltimore.  Centre,  108  ;  Phoenix
chap.,  7.
BEL  AIK.
Archer,  Stevenson,  Attorney  at  Law.     Mount  Ararat,  44.
Bissell,  William  E.,  Hotel-keeper.     Mount  Ararat,  44.
Dallam,  John  S.,  Hotel-keeper  and  Farmer.     Mount  Ararat,  44 ;  Jerusalem
chap.,  9.
Dallam,  William  H.,  Attorney  at  Law.    Secretary,  Mount  Ararat,  44.
CHTJKOHVILIiE,  Harford  County.
Hinkson,  William,  Farmer.     Mount  Ararat,  44.
DAKLIBrGTON,  Harford  County.
Quarles,  Edward,  Farmer.    Mount  Ararat,  44.
Worthington,  Joseph  B.,  Farmer.     Mount  Ararat,  44.
ELKTOM".
Johnson,  James,  Collector  of  Taxes.     Treasurer,  Union,  48.
LAPIDTJM,  Harford  County.
Heath,  Benjamin  F.,  Lumber,  Produce,  and  General  Commission  Merchant.
S.  W.,  Mount  Ararat,  44.
PHILOSOPHY  OF  MASONRY.
The  philosophy  of  Masonry  is  moral  and  spiritual.  Its  object  is  the  improve-
ment of  man,  morally  and  spiritually.  Those  who  view  Masonry  only  as  a  social
institution  (and,  alas,  too  many  Freemasons  only  regard  it  as  such!)  are  like
those  who  value  a  book  for  its  binding,  and  not  for  its  contents.  The  entire
ritual  of  Masonry,  its  ceremonials,  symbolisms,  and  teachings,  is  but  the  outward
expression,  the  body  which  enshrines  the  soul  or  spirit  of  Masonry.  The  Ma-
sonic degrees  are  allegorical  of  youth,  manhood,  and  age,  the  three  stages  of
life's  probation.  In  these  several  degrees  the  duties  of  man,  as  a  moral  and
spiritual  being,  are  inculcated,  having  a  reference  to  his  progression  in  this  and
the  future  life.  The  entering  and  passing  are  preliminary  to  the  raising,  and
man  is  only  finally  raised  after  the  earthly  body  has  ceased  to  be  animated  by

--- Sayfa 218 ---
206  world's  masonic  register.
the  spirit.  There  is  an  interior  spirit  in  all  the  symbols  and  teachings  of  Ma-
sonry. The  plumb,  level,  and  square  are  the  visible  representations  of  the
moral  lessons  they  teach.  We  might,  with  as  much  propriety,  understand  that
the  working  tools  were  intended  for  operative  uses  by  Freemasons,  as  for  us  to
believe  that  Masonry  is  only  a  social  institution.  These  tools  are  necessary  for
illustration,  and  they  are  the  best  that  could  be  adopted  for  that  purpose.  They
can  be  seen  by  the  exterior  vision,  and  handled  with  the  fingers.  The  lessons
they  teach  are  the  soul  or  spirit,  of  which  they  form  the  body;  and  as  each  has
a  different  form,  so  does  each  convey  a  different  lesson,  and  the  various  illustra-
tions of  Masonry,  taken  together  as  a  whole,  constitute  one  perfect  system  of
man's  duties  to  God,  his  neighbor,  and  himself— a  system  embracing  every  duty
of  life,  written  with  the  finger  of  God  in  nature's  illustrated  world,  in  the  vol-
ume of  inspiration,  and  in  the  hearts  and  consciences  of  the  beings  created  in
his  image.  The  ultimate  of  these  teachings  is  the  finite  perfection  of  the  finite
man.  The  philosophy  of  Masonry  teaches  that  man  is  immortal;  and  as  the
life  on  earth  is  only  probationary,  and  he  therefore  cannot  attain  the  ulti-
mate of  perfection  in  this  sphere,  it  will  be  his  privilege  in  the  spirhVworld  to
progress  onward  and  upward  to  the  highest  perfection  his  nature  is  capable  of.
The  teachings  of  Masonry  have  this  object  in  view.  The  work  of  progress  must
commence  here.  Hence  the  teachings  of  Masonry  are  not  merely  speculative.
They  contemplate  the  progress  of  man  in  this  sphere,  and  a  continued  progres-
sion throughout  an  endless  eternity.  To  the  true  Freemason,  the  philosophy  of
Freemasonry  is  no  idle  speculation,  no  vain  theory,  no  visionary  problem.  It  is  to
him  a  living  reality,  and  in  comparison  to  which  all  things  else  are  as  nothing.  It
is,  therefore,  of  paramount  importance  that  the  true  philosophy  of  Masonry  should
be  understood  by  every  disciple  of  the  Order,  as  the  highest  interest  of  man  is
embraced  in  its  principles  and  the  duties  which  it  enjoins.  Progress  is  stamped
upon  all  the  works  of  the  Creator.  There  is  no  cessation,  and  there  can  be
none  in  God's  world.  Man  is  continually  progressing  in  his  physical  develop-
ment, and  through  the  stages  of  youth,  manhood,  and  age,  he  is  imperceptibly
journeying  onward  in  the  road  of  progress  toward  a  higher  and  a  higher  sphere,
toward  the  source  of  all  light,  or  in  the  road  of  ignorance  and  error,  the  road
of  evil  and  darkness.  As  "  Sons  of  Light,"  let  it  be  our  duty  to  progress  up-
ward, to  live  in  accordance  with  the  teachings  of  the  Order,  to  do  all  we  can  to
promote  our  spiritual  advancement,  to  be  living  examples  of  the  philosophy  of
Freemasonry,  and  thus  convince  the  world  around  us  that  Masonry  is  something
more  than  a  mere  social  Order,  that  its  aims  are  to  advance  the  welfare  of  the
human  family,  morally  and  spiritually,  through  the  active  influence  of  its  prin-
ciples exhibited  in  the  daily  life  and  conversation  of  the  members  of  the  frater-
nity.
January  25th,  1820,  the  Masonic  Fraternity  of  Scotland  laid  the  foundation-
stone  of  a  monument  to  the  memory  of  Burns,  the  Ayrshire  poet,  at  Allaway
Kirk,  in  Ayrshire.  Twenty-four  Lodges  participated  in  the  ceremonies.  The
fraternity  of  the  United  States  contributed  liberally  for  the  purpose.

--- Sayfa 219 ---
MASSACHUSETTS.
GRAND  LODGE.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  Massachusetts  was  organized  July  30, 5733.  The  Grand
Lodge  holds  Quarterly  Communications  in  the  City  of  Boston  on  the  second
Wednesdays  of  December,  March,  June,  and  September ;  and  a  Special  Com-
munication, annually,  on  the  27th  of  December.  The  membership  of  the  Grand
Lodge  is  composed  of  the  Grand  Officers,  Past  Grand  and  Deputy  Grand
Masters,  Past  Grand  "Wardens,  and  the  Masters,  Wardens,  and  Proxies  of  the
subordinate  Lodges.
The  revenue  of  the  Grand  Lodge  is  derived  from  the  following  sources  : —
For  Dispensations  for  new  Lodges        ...  .    $10
For  Charters,  in  addition
50
For  every  Initiation
5
Each  Lodge,  annually    6
There  are  100  Chartered  Lodges  and  10  IT.  D.,  in  this  jurisdiction  :  10
Lodges,  in  5859,  reported  6741  members ;  Initiated  during  the  year,  1188.
The  Officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  for  the  present  Masonic  year  are  as  fol-
lows : —
Winslow  Lewis,  M.D.,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
Joel  Spalding,  M.D.,  E.  W.  Senior  Grand  Warden.
William  D.  Coolidge,  R.  W.  Junior  Grand  Warden.
Thos.  Tolman,  R.  W.  Grand  Treasurer.
Charles  W.  Moore,  R.  W.  Grand  Secretary.
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.
Lodge.
Ancient  York,
Amicable,
Aurora,
Ashlar,
Benj.  Franklin,
Bethesda,
Baalbec,
Blaokatone  River,
Bethesda,
Bethel,
Corner  Stone,
Columbian,
Cincinnatus,
Corinthian,
Lowell.
Cambridge.
Fitchburg.
Bockport.
West  Dennis.
Brighton.
East  Boston.
Blaekstone.
Valparaiso,  South
Enfield.
Duxbury.
Boston.
Great  Barrington.
Concord.
Time  of  Meeting.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Thursday.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Monday.
1st  Monday.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Tuesday.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
America.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Thursday.
Friday  before  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Secretary.
John  A.  Goodwin
C.  Tufts.
Geo.  Sherwin.
W.  Widden.
L.  B.  Baker.
E.  A.  Story.
Albert  Huse.
Saml.  Thayer.
John  Holmes.
Geo.  W.  Hunkins.
W.  W.  Hollenbeck.
Benj.  Tolman.
(207)

--- Sayfa 220 ---
208
WORLD'S  MASONIC  REGISTER.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Secretary.
Chicopee,
De  Witt  Clinton,
Evening  Star,
Essex,
Fellowship,
Franklin,
Fraternal,
Germania,
Grecian,
Gate-of-the-Temple,
Henry  Price,
Hiram,
Hampden,
Harmony,
Jerusalem,
Jordan,
Jos.  Warren,
John  Abbot,
John  Cutler,
John  B.  Hammett,
King  Hiram,
King  Solomon,
King  David,
Liberty,
Lafayette,
Merrimac,
Mount  Hermon,
Mount  Zion,
Mount  Tabor,
Mount  Lebanon,
Mount  Horeb,
Mount  Tom,
Mount  Hope,
Mount  Carmel,
Mount  Horeb,
Mount  Vernon,
Martha's  Vineyard,
Marine,
Mountain,
Massachusetts,
Meridian,
Monitor,
Mystic,
Montgomery,
Morning  Star,
Middlesex,
Norfolk  Union,
Old  Colony,
Orange,
Olive  Branch,
Chicopee.
Sandwich.
Lenox.
Salem.
Bridgewater.
Grafton.
Barnstable.
Boston.
Lawrence.
South  Boston.
Charlestown.
Cambridge.
Springfield.
Northfield.
Northampton.
South  Danvers.
Boston.
Somerville.
Abington.
East  Boston.
Provincetown.
Charlestown.
Taunton.
Beverly.
North  Adams.
Haverhill.
Medford.
Barre.
East  Boston.
Boston.
West  Harwich.
Holyoke.
Fall  Fdver.
Lynn.
Woburn.
Maiden.
Tisbury.
Falmouth.
Shelburn  Falls.
Boston.
Natick.
Waltham.
Pittsfield.
Milford.
Worcester.
Farmingham.
Randolph.
Hingham.
Orange.
West  Sutton.
1st  Tuesday.
1st  Friday.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Tuesday.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Wednesday.
1st  Monday.
4th  Monday.
Last  Friday.
4th  Tuesday.
4th  Wednesday.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Tuesday.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
Tuesday  before  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
4th  Tuesday.
1st  Tuesday.
J.  P.  Woodworth.
C.  Dillingham.
G.  W.  Burt.
Win.  Leavitt.
J.  D.  Burrell.
W.  D.  Wheeler.
Saml.  Snow.
G.  J.  Walther.
R.  W.  French.
Benj.  Pope.
E.  S.  Waite.
H.  M.  Fessenden.
H.  A.  Chapin.
J.  D.  Seymour.
S.  D.  Wade.
L.  P.  Brickett.
J.  Bradford.
C.  E.  Gilman.
1st  Monday.
2d  Tuesday.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Monday  before  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
3d  Thursday.
2d  Monday.
1st  Wednesday.
1st  Friday.
Friday  before  f.  m.
Monday  after  f.  m.
1st  Wednesday.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Tuesday.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
3d  Monday.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Tuesday.
Tuesday  before  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tuesday  before  f.  m.
A.  Baker.
G.  H.  Marden.
A.  Baylies.
J.  H.  Kendall.
L.  C.  Homer.
J.  Edwards.
G.  W.  W.  Saville.
II.  J.  Shattnok.
G.  Butts.
T.  Waterman.
Wm.  E.  Ansell.
J.  E.  Morrill.
A.  B.  Leonard.
A.  S.  Moore.
J.  M.  Leathe.
W.  D.  Holden.
A.  W.  Smith.
G.  W.  Swift.
Ozn  Miller.
E.  R.  Frost.
J.  B.  Fairbank.
T.  W.  Farnsworth.
S.  E.  Howe.
A.  M.  Leland.
H.  Earl.
S.  B.  Wilde.
J.  Hunt.
C.  N.  Marsh.
Sat,  on  or  b.  f.  m.      S.  Sibley.

--- Sayfa 221 ---
MASSACHUSETTS
209
LODGE.
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
Secretary.
Oxford,
Orphans'  Hope,
Putnam,
Philanthropic,
Plymouth,
Pentucket,
Paul  Revere,
Pequossette,
Pilgrim,
Quaboag,
Quinebaug,
Rising  Star,
Republican,
Rural,
Revere,
St.  Paul's,
St.  John's,
St.  Mark's,
St.  Paul's,
St.  Matthew's,
St.  Andrew's,
St.  Alban's,
Social  Harmony,
Star  of  Bethlehem,
Solomon's  Temple,
Star  in  the  East,
Tyrian,
Thomas,
Union,
Union,
United  Brethren,
Warren,
Washington,
Wilder,
Winslow  Lewis,
Wyoming,
Wisdom.
Oxford.
East  Weymouth.
East  Cambridge.
Marblehead.
Plymouth.
Lowell.
North  Bridgewater.
Watertown.
Harwich.
Warren.
Southbridge.
Stoughton.
Greenfield.
Quincy.
Boston.
South  Boston.
Boston.
Newburyport.
Groton.
Andover.
Boston.
Foxboro'.
Wareham.
Chelsea.
Uxbridge.
North  Bedford.
Gloucester.
Palmer.
Dorchester.
Nantucket.
Marlboro'.
Amesbury.
Roxbury.
Leominster.
Boston.
Melrose.
West  Stockbridge.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.    C.  H.  Pratt.
3d  Tuesday.  H.  A.  Arnold.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.    J.  Orne.
Monday  before  f.  m.  W.  Bishop.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.  Eliphalet  Hills.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.   J.  R.  Perkins.
Thurs.  on  or  a.  f.  m.  W.  W.  Mead.
  W.  Freeman.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Tuesday.
1st  Tuesday.
1st  Monday.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.f.  m.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
3d  Wednesday.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Monday.
1st  Tuesday.
1st  Monday.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Monday.
A.  Caper.
H.  D.  Merrick.
C.  A.  Cummings.
Win.  W.  Baker.
H.  Smith.
S.  E.  Weston.
J.  H.  Bragdon.
D.  Blanchard.
M.  Sands.
A.  A.  Wellington.
H.  E.  Clapp.
H.  Bower.
C.  A.  Blanchard.
J.  C.  Keith.
L.  H.  Morrill.
J.  S.  Webber.
Wm.  Holbrook.
J.  S.  Ware.
C.  P.  Swain.
Wed.  on  or  ne.  f.  m.  S.  F.  Merrill.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.       E.  Holden.
2d  Friday.  D.  Pulsifer.
4th  Wednesday.  L.  S.  Gould.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.    C.  W.  Kniffin.
GRAND  CHAPTER.
Organized  5798.
This  Grand  Chapter  holds  Quarterly  Meetings  on  the  second  Tuesdays  of
December,  March,  and  June,  and  an  Annual  Meeting  on  the  first  Tuesday  in
September.  Its  meetings  are  held  in  the  City  of  Boston.  It  has  22  subordi-
nate Chapters  under  its  jurisdiction.  The  latest  reports  are  of  5857,  at  which
time  19  Chapters  reported  1098  members,  and  242  exaltations.  Pees  paid  to
Grand  Chapter,  $846.  This  Grand  Chapter  is  subordinate  to  the  General  Grand
Chapter.

--- Sayfa 222 ---
210
worid's  masonic  register.
SUBORDINATE  CHAPTERS.
Time  of  Meeting.
St.  Andrew's,
King  Cyrus,
Washington,
Adoniram,
Franklin,
Morning  Star,
St.  Paul's,
Mount  Zion,
Thomas,
Worcester,
Sutton,
Mount  Lebanon,
Northampton,
Concord,
Mount  Horeb,
St.  John's,
Shekinah,
Oreint,
Pentucket,
Buckskin,
King  Solomon's,
Keystone,
Boston.
Newburyport.
Salem.
New  Bedford.
Greenfield.
Springfield.
Boston.
Stoughton.
Fitchburg.
Worcester.
Sutton.
Milford.
Northampton.
Framingham.
Lowell.
East  Boston.
Chelsea.
Hyannis.
Haverhill.
1st  Wednesday.
Tuesday  after  full  moon.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
1st  Wednesday.
Wednesday  after  full  moon.
2d  Tuesday.
3d  Tuesday.
Monday  before  full  moon.
Wednesday  before  f.  m.
2d  Friday.
Tuesday  before  full  moon.
Thursday  after  full  moon.
1st  Friday.
1st  Thursday.
Monday  on  or  before  f.  m.
4th  Monday.
3d  Friday.
Thursday  on  or  before  f.  m.
1st  Friday.
GRAND  COUNCIL.
Organized  5826.
The  proceedings  of  this  Grand  Council  have  never  been  published.    This
Grand  Council  holds  its  Annual  Communication  in  the  City  of  Boston,  on  the
second  Tuesday  in  December.    It  has  6  subordinate  Councils  under  its  jurisdic-
tion, having  246  members.
SUBORDINATE   COUNCILS.
Name.
Boston,
East  Boston,
Hiram,
Springfield,
Ahasuerus,
Titus  Strong,
Location.
Boston.
East  Boston.
Worcester.
Springfield.
Lowell.
Greenfield.
Time  of  Meeting.
3d  Thursday.
2d  Friday.
Quarterly.
GRAND  COMMANDERY.
The  Grand  Secretary  of  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the  U.  S.,  in  the  published
transactions  of  the  G.  G.  Encampment  at  its  triennial  session  in  1859,  states  that
the  Grand  Commandery  of  Massachusetts  and  Ehode  Island  was  formed  "prior
to  1819,  (date  not  known.)"  He  also  informs  us  that  there  are  9  Comnianderies
in  that  jurisdiction,  having'  613  members.  The  M.  E.  Grand  Commander,
Winslow  Lewis,  in  a  recent  letter  to  us,  wrote  that  the  Grand  Commandery  does
not  publish  its  proceedings.

--- Sayfa 223 ---
MASSACHUSETTS.  211
SUBSCHIBERS'  NAMES.
BOND'S  VILLAGE.
Bond,  E.    Hon.  Member,  Thomas  Lodge.
Kirk,  F.  H.,  Daguerreotypist.    Masonic  Union  Lodge,  Troy,  Vermont.
Smith,  Orin  B.,  Overseer  in  Cotton  Mills.    Mount  Tom  Lodge.
BOSTON.
Lewis,  Winslow,  M.D.  Grand  Master;  P.  G.  H.  P.,  Grand  Chapter;  G.  M.,
Grand  Encampment,  Massachusetts  and  Rhode  Island ;  Grand  Generalissimo,
Grand  Encampment,  U.  S. ;  St.  John's  Lodge ;  St.  Paul's  chap. ;  Boston  coun. ;
Boston  com. ;  Hon.  Member,  Winslow  Lewis  and  Germania  Lodges,  Boston ;
Pythagoras,  86,  New  York ;  Clemente  Amitie,  Paris ;  De  Molay  com.,  Boston.
BBOOKFIELD.
Davis,  Levi,  Merchant.    Quaboag  Lodge.
CHICOPEE  FALLS,  Hampden  County.
Colton,  Geo.  S.,  Weaving  Overseer.    Chicopee  Lodge.
GBEENEIELD.
Davis,  Wendell  T.,  Attorney  at  Law.  P.  M.,  Republican  Lodge ;  P.  H.  P.,
Franklin  chap. ;  E.  &  S.  M. ;  Boston  com. ;  P.  G.  H.  P.,  Grand  Chapter,  Mass.
Fisk,  Chas.  L.,  M.D.  Initiated  in  Hamilton  Lodge,  36,  Lawrenceville,  Pa.,
ax.  5826 ;  P.  S.  W.,  Republican  Lodge ;  E.  King,  Franklin  chap. ;  Deputy  T.
HI.  G.  M.,  Titus  Strong  coun. ;  Washington  com.,  1,  Hartford,  Connecticut.
Howland,  Rufus,  Druggist  and  Apothecary.  Treasurer,  Republican  Lodge ;
Treasurer,  Republican  chap.
Mirick,  Henry  D.,  Proprietor  Greenfield  Democrat.  .  Secretary,  Republican
Lodge ;  C.  H.,  Franklin  chap.
Packard,  R.  A.,  Cashier  Franklin  County  Bank.     Republican  Lodge.
Thornily,  Joshua,  Inspector,  Russel's  Manufacturing  Company.  J.  W.,  Re-
publican Lodge.
Walker,  Wm.  A.,  Insurance  Agent  and  Accountant.    Republican  Lodge.
HYANNIS.
Chapman,  Dr.  John  Winslow,  Dentist,  No.  141  East  45th  Street,  New  York,
and  branch  office  at  Hyannis,  Mass.     Fraternal  Lodge.
,  WOBTHAMPTON,  Hampshire  County.
Childs,  Henry,  firm  of  Bridgman  &  Childs,  Booksellers,  Publishers,  and
Blank-book  Manufacturers.     W.  M.,  Jerusalem  Lodge.
Crafts,  D.  W.,  Boots'and  Shoes.  P.  M.,  Jerusalem  Lodge;  H.  P.,  North-
ampton chap. ;  Titus  Strong  coun.
March,  Wm.  R.,  Proprietor  Warner  House.     Jerusalem  Lodge.
Peck,  A.,  Insurance  and  Real  Estate  Broker.    Jerusalem  Lodge.

--- Sayfa 224 ---
212  world's  masonic  register.
PALMER,
Hall  &  Trumble,  Flour  and  Grain  Dealers.     Thomas  Lodge.
Wassum,  F.  J.,  Merchant  Tailor.     Thomas  Lodge.
SHELBUKETE  PALLS,  Franklin  County.
"Watson,  T.  M.,  Of  Continental  Vocalists.     St.  John's,  260,  Pa. ;  M.  E.  M.
THOKNDIKE.
Clark,  Ben.  S.,  "Weaving  Overseer.     Thomas  Lodge.
Fuller,  Jas.  R.,  Overseer  Dressing-rooms,  Cotton  Mills.     Thomas  Lodge.
Griffith,  Wm.  "W.,  Carpenter  and  Joiner.     Thomas  Lodge.
Thayer,  John,  Merchant.    Thomas  Lodge.
WAKEFIELD,  Hampden  County.
Copeland,  E.  P.,  Plane  Manufacturer.     Mount  Moriah  Lodge.
.  Dow,  Samuel,  Whip  Manufacturer.     S.  W.,  Mount  Moriah  Lodge.
Johnson,  "Wm.  A.,  Church   Organ  Manufacturer.     P.  M.,  Mount  Moriah
Lodge ;  Morning  Star  chap. ;  Knight  of  Red  Cross.
Lewis,  H.  B.,  Attorney  at  Law,  Notary  Public,  and  Justice  of  the  Peace.
"W.  M.,  Mount  Moriah  Lodge ;  Morning  Star  chap.
WAKE.
Hitchcock,  G.  B.,  Druggist.     Quaboag  Lodge.
WAEEEN.
Perry,  Milton,  "Wool  Sorter.     Quaboag  Lodge.
Russell,  Daniel,  Merchant.     Secretary,  Quaboag  Lodge.
Shepard,  D.  W.,  Merchant.    "W.  M.,  Quaboag  Lodge.
Sibley,  F.  R.,  Physician.     Quaboag  Lodge.
Sibly,  S.  H.,  "Woolen  Manufactory.     Marshal,  Quaboag  Lodge.
Towne,  E.  E.,  Merchant.     Quaboag  Lodge.
Whipple,  M.  R.,  Warp  Manufactory.    J.  Steward,  Quaboag  Lodge.
Benjamin  Franklin  reprinted,  in  1734,  Anderson's  Constitutions,  which  was
the  first  Masonic  publication  published  in  America.
General  Joseph  Warren,  Provincial  Grand  Master  of  America,  was  killed  at
the  battle  of  Bunker  Hill,  June  17,  1775.
General  David  Wooster,  Provincial  Grand  Master  of  Connecticut,  was  killed
near  Ridgefield,  Conn.,  April  27,  1777.
Robert  Bums  was  initiated  in  1783.    Died  July  21st,  1796,  aged  38.
At  the  battle  of  Tippecanoe,  November  7th,  1811,  Brothers  Col.  Joseph
Hamilton  Daviess,  Grand  Master  of  Kentucky,  and  Col.  Abraham  Owen,  besides
other  Masons,  were  slain.
In  1802,  6th  September,  the  foundation  stone  of  the  City  Hall,  New  York,
was  laid  by  Edward  Livingston,  Mayor  of  the  City,  and  Grand  Master  of
Masons  in  New  York.

--- Sayfa 225 ---
MICHIGAN.
GRAND  LODGE.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  Michigan  -was  organized  June  28th,  5826.  The  Annual
Communication  of  the  Grand  Lodge  is  held  in  the  City  of  Detroit,  commencing
the  second  Wednesday  in  January.  The  Grand  Lodge  is  composed  of  the  Grand
Officers,  Past  Grand  Masters,  and  Masters  and  Wardens  of  the  subordinate
Lodges,  and  Past  Masters,  who  are  honorary  members  without  the  right  to  vote,
excepting  the  last  Past  Masters,  who  are  full  members  of  the  Grand  Lodge.
The  revenue  of  the  Grand  Lodge  is  derived  from  the  following  sources  : —
For  every  Dispensation    ...  ...     $20  00
For  a  Warrant,  in  addition

30  00
For  Dispensations  for  the  three  Degrees  .        .        .        .       10  00
For  Dispensation  for  one  Degree         ....  5  00
For  Grand  Lodge  Certificates
1  00
For  every  Initiation    1  00
For  every  Admission
1  00
For  every  member    25
There  were  109  Chartered  Lodges  and  13  Under  Dispensation  under  the
jurisdiction  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Michigan,  as  per  tabular  statement  for  the
year  ending  December  27th,  5859.  The  same  document  shows  that  there  were
955  Initiated,  923  Eaised  and  Admitted,  225  Dimitted,  28  Expelled,  281  Re-
jected, 62  Died,  154  Suspended,  and  the  total  number  of  members  5816.  Dues
paid,  $2299  79,  and  $210  for  seven  Charters.
The  Officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  for  the  present  Masonic  year  are  : —
William  L.  Greenly,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
S.  B.  Brown,  R.  W.  Deputy  Grand  Master.
David  A.  Wright,  B.  W.  Senior  Grand  Warden.
Elisha  Leach,  B.  W.  Junior  Grand  Warden.
Wm.  H.  MaOmber,  R.  W.  Grand  Treasurer.
James  Fenton,  R.  W.  Grand  Secretary.
Rev.  George  Taylor,  Grand  Chaplain.
Albert  H.  Jordan,  Grand  Architect.
Stilman  Blanchard,  Grand  Visitor  and  Lecturer.
F.  Carlisle,  Senior  Grand  Deacon.
T.  H.  Tracy,  Junior  Grand  Deacon.
Joseph  P.  Whiting,  Grand  Marshal.
T.  B.  Eldred,  Grand  Sword  Bearer.
A.  Partridge,  Grand  Pursuivant.
Charles  D.  Howard,  Grand  Steward  and  Tyler.
(213)

--- Sayfa 226 ---
214
world's  masonic  register.
SUBORDINATE   LODGES.
No.      Lodge.
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
Master.
1  Zion,
Detroit.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Daniel  Anderson.
2  Detroit,
Detroit.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Oliver  Bourke.
3  StrictObservance.Detroit.
4  St. Joseph  Valley,Niles.
5  Rochester,            Rochester.
Mon.  or  or  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
John  P.  Fiske.
S.  M.  Pratt.
J.  V.  Lambertson.
6  Mt.  Clemens,
7  Washington,
Mt.  Clemens.
Tekonsha.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
R.  P.  Eldredge.
Theron  Hamilton.
8  Trenton,
Trenton.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
N.  C.  Alvord.
9  Evergreen,
10  Dowagiac,
11  Pine  Grove,
St.  Clair.
Dowagiac.
Port  Huron.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
A.  J.  Cummings.
P.  B.  Beckwith.
E.  W.  Harris.
12  Battle  Creek,
13  Phoenix,
14  Murat,
15  Oriental,
Battle  Creek.
Ypsilanti.
Albion.
Ann  Arbor.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
3d  Monday.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
David  Shephard.
Charles  B.  Bush.
Joseph  W.  Clark.
16  La  Fayette,
17  Jackson,
Jonesville.
Jackson.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  Thursday.
G.  C.  Monroe.
J.  B.  Tomlinson.
18  Tyre,
Coldwater.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m. S.  L.  Dart.
19  Adrian,
Adrian.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m. A.  H.  Wood.
20  St.  Albans,
Marshall.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Isaac  Beers.
21  Pontiac,
Pontiac.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
A.  B.  Matthews.
22  Kalamazoo,
Kalamazoo.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thos.  C.  Brownell.
23  Flint,
Flint.
.  Hon.  W.  M.  Fenton.
24  Mt.  Hermon,
Centerville.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
J.  J.  Dresler.
25  Paw  Paw,
Paw  Paw.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m. 0.  C.  Simmons.
26  Maxson,
Hudson.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Jesse  Maxson.
27  Monroe,
Monroe.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
J.  R.  Grosvenor.
28  Union,
29  Humanity,
30  Concord,
Union  City.
Homer.
Concord.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Edwin  Perry.
David  Dorsey.
A.  J.  Paddock.
31  Portland,
Portland.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m. Moses  B.  Beers.
32  Fidelity,
Hillsdale.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m. E.  H.  C.  Wilson.
33  Lansing,
34  Grand  River,
35  Siloam,
Lansing.
Grand  Rapids.
Constantine.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
E.  R.  Merrifield.
Benj.  B.  Church.
Thomas  Wass,  Jr.
36  Ionia,
Ionia.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Z.  E.  Bliss.
37  Lyons,
38  Howell,
Lyons.
Howell.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
D.  C.  Spalding.
S.  F.  Hubbell.
39  Western  Star,
Berrien.
E.  A.  Brown.
40  Franklin,
Litchfield.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
A.  R.  Brown.
41  Romeo,
Romeo.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Henry  M.  Case.
44  Birmingham,
46  Orion,
Birmingham.
Orion.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
A.  Partridge.
W.  E.  Littell.
47  Plymouth  Rock,
48  Austin,
Nankin.
Austin.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m. T.  J.  Dean.
B.  Cogshall.

--- Sayfa 227 ---
MICHIGAN.
215
Location.  Time  of  Meeting.                 Master.
Sturgis.  Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.    N.  J.  Packard.
Jackson.  1st  &  3d  Weds.           J.  L.  Mitchell,  M.D.
Almont.  Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.    H.  D.  Fitch.
Hastings.    Z.  Scidmore.
Goodrich.  Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Lapeer.  Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.   J.  R.  White.
Cassopolis.  Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.    A.  J.  Smith.
St.  Joseph.  Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.       B.  F.  Chadwick.
Three  Rivers.  Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.   John  Cowling.
Port  Huron.  Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.    F.  L.  Wells.
Climax.  Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.    H.  Arnold.
Clark8ton.  Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.       Enos  Church.
Lexington.  Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.    John  Devine.
Newport.  Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.       D.  McCallum.
Eaton  Eapids.  Last  Thursday.           T.  S.  S.  Havens.
Washington.  Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.      Charles  Bennett.
Dexter.  Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.       F.  Carlisle.
Lansing.  Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.  W.  H.  Pinckney.
Ontonagon.  Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.    Jas.  Burtenshaw.
Buchanan.  Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.      Charles  Clark.
Tecumseh.  Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.      M.  A.  Patterson.
Mason.  Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.    P.  McKernan.
Mackinac.  Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.    Bela  Chapman.
Colon.    Martin  Gloyd.
Dundee.    B.  J.  Tayer.
Utica.    Oliver  Adams.
Pinckney.    C.  W.  Haze.
Saginaw  City.    Wm.  L.  Webb.
Otsego.    H.  C.  Clapp.
Saginaw  City.    M.  C.  T.  Plessner.
Byron.    B.  Bostwick.
Owosso.  Wed.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.  M.  W.  Quackenbush.
New  Baltimore   Chas.  Terry.
Bellevue.    B.  B.  Hughes.
Oxford.    '.   P.  M.  Parker.
Ann  Arbor.    B.  T.  Corning.
Grand  Bapids.  Tues.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.  E.  D.  Benedict.
,  Kalamazoo.    C.H.Brown.
Butler.    Miles  M.  Warren.
Belleville.  Wed.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.  S.  P.  Hewett.
Lowell.  Tues.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.  Thos.  Daniels.
Detroit.    Albert  H.  Jordan.
Galesburg.    G.  B.  Peters.
Osseo.  Wed.  on  or  bet.  f.  m.  Chauncy  Leonard.
Detroit.    Joseph  J.  Rhodes.
Morenci.    F.  N.  Butler.
Greenville.  Mon.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.  John  Lewis.
Niles.    W.J.  Edwards.
Waterford.    F.  W.  Fifield.
49  Meredian  Sun,
50  Michigan,
51  Almont,
52  Hastings,
53  Atlas,
54  Lapeer,
55  Backus,
56  Occidental,
57  Three  Rivers,
58  Port  Huron,
59  Climax,
60  Cedar,
61  Lexington,
62  S.  Ward,
63  Eaton  Rapids,
64  Macomb,
65  Washtenaw,
66  Cap.  Strict  Ob.
67  Ontonagon,
68  Buchanan,
69  Tecumseh,
70  Mason,
71  Mackinac,
73  Colon,
74  Dundee,
75  Utica,
76  Livingston,
77  Saginaw,
78  Otsego,
79  Germania,
80  Byron,
81  Owosso,
82  Lake  St.  Clair,
83  Bellevue,
84  Oxford,
85  Ann  Arbor,
86  Valley  City,
87  Anchor  of  S.  0.
88  Butler,
89  Myrtle,
90  Lowell,
91  Ashlar,
92  Prairie.
93  Star,
94  Charity,
95  J.  .Moore,
96  Greenville,
97  Niles,
98  Waterford,

--- Sayfa 228 ---
216
world's  masonic  register.
No.     Lodge.
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
Master.
99  Decatur,
100  Oakwood,
101  Marquette,
102  Blanchard,
103  Greenly,
104  White  Pigeon,
105  St.  John's,
106  St.  Peter's,
107  Eureka,
108  Eockland,
109  Fentonville,
110  Hiram,
111  Allegan,
112  Wayne,
113  Hamilton,
114  Blissfield,
115  Corunna,
116  Excelsior,
117  Reading,
118  Schoolcraft,
119  Rising  Sun,
120  Charlotte,
121  Pokagon,
122  Commerce,
123  Ottawa,
V.  D.  Ithica,
U.  D.  Eagle,
U.  D.  Fairfield,
U.  D.  Stockbridge.
U.  D.  Forest,
U.  D.  Ovid,
U.  D.  Ypsilanti,
U.  D.  Bay  City,
Decatur.
Oakwood.
Marquette.
Petersburg.
Adrian.
White  Pigeon.
St.  John's.
Edwardsburg.
Monroe.
Rockland.
Fentonville.
Flat  Rock.
Allegan.
Wayne.
Moscow.
Blissfield.
Corunna.
Grass  Lake.
Beading.
Schoolcraft.
Lawrence.
Charlotte.
Pokagon.
Commerce.
Eastmanville.
Ithica.
Burr  Oak.
Fairfield.
Stockbridge.
Berlin.
Ovid.
Ypsilanti.
Bay  City.
  H.  Canoll.
  Sloan  Cooley.
  M.  H.  Maynard.
  W.  Corbin.
Mon.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.  John  V.  Lyon.
Tues.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.  J.  E.  Johnson.
Mon.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.  R.  Plumstead.
  VA.  S.  Cook.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.    John  M.  Oliver.
  J.  B.  Townsend.
Wed.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.  M.  Ayers.
  A.  M.  Arzeno.
  E.  B.  Bassett.
Mon.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.  E.  P.  Lewis.
  S.  P.  Simons.
  David  Carpenter.
Tues.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.  H.  McCurdy.
  O.  R.  Dibble.
  Geo.  Fitzsimmons.
  Rufus  A.  Roys.
  Emory  R.  Briggs.
  E.  S.  Lacey.
  John  Byrnes.
  Solon  Cooley.
  Jas.  M.  Kelly.
  Wm.  W.  Comstock.
  O.  D.  Cowles.
  Rev.  I.  Crabb.
  Gilbert  E.  Corbin.
GRAND  CHAPTER.
The  Grand  Chapter  of  Michigan  was  organized  in  5848.  Its  Annual  Convo-
cations are  held  on  the  second  Monday  in  January,  at  such  place  as  the  Grand
Chapter  determines.  Its  Annual  Convocation,  in  5861,  will  be  held  at  Detroit,
the  place  where  the  Grand  Lodge  meets.  This  Grand  Chapter  is  subordinate  to
the  General  Grand  Chapter.  There  are  24  subordinate  Chapters  in  this  juris-
diction. On  the  27th  of  December,  5859,  the  membership  of  the  Chapters  was
1080,  and  dues  to  Grand  Chapter,  $782  35.  The  work  of  the  Chapters  for  the
year  ending  December  27th,  5859,  shows  the  following  :  Exalted,  173 ;  Eejeoted,
18 ;  Admitted,  49  ;  Suspended,  71 ;  Resigned,  47 ;  Expelled,  5  ;  Died,  18.

--- Sayfa 229 ---
MICHIGAN.
211
No.       Name.
SUBORDINATE  CHAPTERS.
Location.  Time  of  Meeting.
1  Monroe,
2  St.  Joseph's  Valley,
3  Jackson,
4  La  Fayette,
5  Oakland,
6  Washtenaw,
7  Grand  Rapids,
8  Jonesville,
9  Lansing,
10  Adrian,
11  Centerville,
12  St.  Clair,
13  Kalamazoo,
14  Ionia,
15  Washington,
16  Peninsular,
17  Romeo,
18  Hillsdale,
19  Battle  Creek,
20  Ontonagon,
21  Temple,
22  River  Raisin,
23  Salathiel,
24  Eaton  Rapids,
Detroit.
Niles.
Jaokson.
Marshall.
Pontiac.
Ann  Arbor.
Grand  Rapids.
Jonesville.
Lansing.
Adrian.
Centerville.
St.  Clair.
Kalamazoo.
Ionia.
Flint.
Detroit.
Romeo.
Hillsdale.
Battle  Creek.
Ontonagon.
Coldwater.
Monroe.
Three  Rivers.
Eaton  Rapids.
Thursday  on  or  bef.  full  m.
Thursday  on  or  bef.  full  m.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
Wednesday  on  or  bef.  full  m.
Wednesday  on  or  bef.  full  m.
Monday  on  or  bef.  full  m.
Monday  on  or  bef.  full  m.
Thursday  after  full  moon.
Tuesday  on  or  bef.  full  m.
Thursday  on  or  bef.  full  m.
Wednesday  on  or  bef.  full  m.
Tuesday  on  or  bef.  full  m.
Tuesday  on  or  bef.  full  m.
Friday  on  or  bef.  full  moon.
Thursday  on  or  bef.  full  m.
Friday  before  full  moon.
Wednesday  on  or  bef.  full  m.
Friday  after  full  moon.
Thursday  on  or  bef.  full  m.
2d  Thursday.
Wednesday  on  or  af.  full  m.
Friday  on  or  bef.  full  m.
Friday  after  full  moon.
GRAND  COUNCIL.
Organized  5858.
The  Grand  Council  of  Michigan  holds  its  Annual  Convocation  on  the  second
Tuesday  of  January.  It  has  8  subordinate  Councils  under  its  jurisdiction,  which
have  153  members,  as  per  returns  January,  5860.
No.       Name.
Location.
1   Monroe,
Detroit.
2  St.  Clair,
St.  Clair.
3  Pontiac,
Pontiac.
4  River  Raisin,
Monroe.
SUBORDINATE  COUNCILS.
No.         Name.
5  JoneBville,
6  Mount  Moriah,
7  Three  Rivers,
U.  D.  Adrian,
Location.
Jonesville.
Coldwater.
Three  Rivers.
Adrian.
GRAND  COMMANDERY.
Organized  April  7,  1858.
The  Grand  Commandery  of  Michigan  holds  its  Annual  Conclave  on  the  first
Tuesday  in  June,  at  the  City  of  Detroit.  It  has  9  subordinate  Commanderies
under  its  jurisdiction,  and  196  Sir  Knights,  as  per  report  June,  1859.

--- Sayfa 230 ---
218
world's  masonic  register.
SUBORDINATE  COMMANDERIES.
No.     Name.
Location.
No.     Name.
1   Detroit,
Detroit.
6   Romeo,
2  Pontiao,
Pontiac.
7   St.  Clair,
3  Eureka,
Hillsdale.
9  Jaekson,
4  Monroe,
Monroe.
10  Jacobs,
5  De  Molay,
Grand  Rapids.
Location.
Romeo.
Port  Huron.
Jackson.
Coldwater.
SUBSCRIBERS'   NAMES.
ADMAN,  Lenawee  County.
Adrian  Lodge,  19,  meets  Wednesday  on  or  before  full  moon.
Allen,  William  D.,  Track  Master.     Greenly,  103;  Adrian  chap.,  10.
Backus,  Clark  B.,  Postmaster.     Adrian,  19.
Botsford,  J.  G.,  Proprietor  Botsford  Hotel.     Greenly,  103.
Cole,  James  H.,  Bank  Teller.     S.  D.,  Greenly,  103  ;  Adrian  chap.,  10.
Converse,  Erastus,  Harness-maker.     Tyler,  Adrian,  19  ;  Adrian  chap.,  10.
Drew,  Delos.     Adrian,  19  ;  Adrian  chap.,  10.
Garrett,  H.  D.,  Foreman  M.  S.  N.  I.  R.  B.  Machine  shop.     Greenly,  103.
Grannis,  Henry  A.,  Express  Agent.  J.  W.,  Greenly,  103 ;  Secty.,  Adrian
chap.,  10  ;  Recorder,  Adrian  coun.,  U.  D.
Greenly,  W.  L.,  Attorney  and  Counselor,  Ex-Governor.  Grand  Master  of
Grand  Lodge,  and  P.  G.  H.  P.  of  Grand  chap.,  Michigan.
Hart,  Pred,  Bank  Teller.     S.  W.,  Greenly,  103 ;  S.,  Adrian  chap.,  10.
King,  Wm.  P.,  Watchmaker.  S.  D.,  Adrian,  19  ;  P.  S.,  Adrian  chap.,  10 ;
Adrian  coun.,  U.  D.
Knowles,  J.  H,  Bookbinder.    Bloomington,  43,  Illinois.
Lantz,  Peter  A..  Ticket  Agent.     Oriental,  33,  Chicago,  111.
Lathrop,  Miles,  Locomotive  Engineer.     Adrian,  19  ;  Adrian  chap.,  10.
Lyon,  John  V.,  Banker.  W.  M.,  Greenly,  103;  C.  H.,  Adrian  chap.,  10;
Monroe  com.,  4.
Marvin,  A.  L,  Mercantile  Clerk.     Adrian,  19.
Mills,  Wm.  L.,  Hat  and  Cap  Manufacturer.  Treas.,  Greenly,  103;  Adrian
chap.,  10.
Nichols,  E.  R.,  Locomotive  Engineer.     St.  Alban's,  20;  R.  A.  Mason.
Payne,  Geo.  P.,  Blank-book  Manufacturer.  P.  M.,  Adrian,  19 ;  P.  H.  P.,
Adrian  chap.,  10,  K.  T.
Secord,  Asa  P.,  Telegraph  line  repairer.    Myrtle,  89.
Starret,  Charles,  R.  R.  Conductor.     Greenly,  103 ;  Adrian  chap.,  10.
Stevenson,  James,  Moulder.    Sylvania,  287,  Ohio.
Wheeler,  L.  J.,  Locomotive  Engineer.  Greenly,  103 ;  Adrian  chap.,  10 ;
Adrian  coun.,  U.  D. ;  Monroe  com.,  5.
Wood,  A.  H,  Clothing  Merchant.   W.  M.,  Adrian,  19  ;  P.  O.  H.,  Adrian,  10.
Woodberry,  Dwight  A.,  Proprietor  Bracket  House.     Greenly,  103.

--- Sayfa 231 ---
MICHIGAN.  219
BIEMIUGHAM,  Oakland  County.
Bodine,  John,  Merchant  Tailor  and  Justice  of  the  Peace.    Treas.,  Birming-
ham, 44.
Brittan,  Wm.  C,  Saddle  and  Harness.     Secty.,  Birmingham,  44.
Mitchell,  Robert  J.,  Merchant.     Steward,  Birmingham,  44.
Partridge,  A.,  Wagon  and  Carriage  Manufacturer.    W.  M.,  Birmingham,  44.
Bouse,  Peter,  retired  from  business.    Past  Treas.,  Birmingham,  44.
COLD  "WATER,  Branch  County.
Allen,  A.,  firm  of  Allen  &  Pratt,  Dealers  in  Boots  and  Shoes.  P.  S.  W.,
Tyre,  18 ;  Scribe,  Temple  chap.,  21 ;  Treas.,  Mt.  Moriah  coun.,  6  ;  Capt.  G.,
Jacob's  com.,  10.
Barrett,  Wallace  W.,  Attorney  at  Law  and  Solicitor  in  Chancery.     Tyre,  18.
Beech,  John  Henry,  Physician  and  Surgeon.  P.  S.  W.,  Tyre,  18 ;  H.  P.,
Temple  chap.,  21  ;  Mt.  Moriah  coun.,  6.
Bovee,  David,  Wholesale  and  Betail  Grocer.  J.  W.,  Tyre,  18  ;  King,  Temple
chap.,  21 ;  Steward,  Mt.  Moriah  coun.,  6.
Dart,  Seaman  L.,  Boot  and  Shoe  Manufacturer.  W.  M.,  Tyre,  18 ;  P.  S.,
Temple  chap.,  21 ;  Thrice  111.  G.  M.,  Mt.  Moriah  coun.,  6 ;  Jacob's  com.,  10.
Drake,  B.  H,  Boot,  Shoe,  and  Leather  Dealer.  P.  S.  W.,  Tyre,  18 ;  G.  M.
2d  Veil,  Temple  chap.,  21 ;  P.  0.  of  W.,  Mt.  Moriah  coun.,  6  ;  Jacob's  com.,  10.
Eddy,  Franklin  T.,  Attorney  and  Register  of  Deeds.  Tyre,  18 ;  Secy.,  Temple
chap.,  21;  Recorder,  Mt.  Moriah  coun.,  6;  E.  C,  Jacob's  com.,  10.
Mather,  Elihu,  Leather  Dealer.  Tyre,  18 ;  Initiated  a.l.  5803 ;  Treas.,
Temple  chap.,  21 ;  Mt.  Moriah  coun.,  6.
Nichols,  Phineas  P.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.     Sec,  Tyre,  18.
Norton,  A.  T.,  Proprietor  Michigan  Southern  Hotel.     Paw  Paw,  25.
Rodman,  A.,  Merchant.    Tyre,  18  ;  Temple  chap.,  21.
COBTTlfTJ'A,  Shiawassee  County.
Allen,  George  N.,  Proprietor  Allen  Hotel.     Corunna,  115.
Belden,  A.  A.,  Merchant.     Treas.,  Corunna,  115.
Converse,  C.  S.,  General  Land  and  Tax  and  County  Register.     Corunna,  115.
Ewing  Charles,  Shoemaker  and  Farmer.     Corunna,  115.
Fitch,  Joseph  M.,  Farmer.     S.  W.,  Corunua,  115.
Goodell,  George  W.,  Mercantile  Clerk.  J.  D.,  Corunna,  115  ;  Western  Star
chap.,  35,  Batavia,  N.  Y.
Hewitt,  John  Irving,  M,D.  and  Druggist.  Corunna,  115 ;  P.  K.,  Monroe
chap.,  1 ;  Monroe  coun.,  1 ;  Detroit  com.,  1.
Ireland,  Joseph,  Saddle  and  Harness.     Corunna,  115.
McCurdy  &  Raynale,  Attorneys  and  Counselors  at  Law.     Corunna,  115.
Merrill,  James  C,  Mercantile  Clerk.     Corunna,  115.
Moore,  E.  C,  Hardware  Merchant.     J.  W.,  Corunna,  115.
Parsons,  S.  Titus,  Prosecuting  Attorney.     Corunna,  115.
Phelps,  Lorenzo  Dow,  Bookseller,  Stationer,  and  News  Agent.   Corunna,  115
Rollo,  Wm.,  Mechanic.     Corunna,  115.
Thayer,  Joseph  M.,  Sash,  Door,  and  Blind  Manufacturer.  Steward,  Corunna,
115.
15

--- Sayfa 232 ---
220  world's  masonic  rkgistek.
Wade,  E.  P.,  Boot,  Shoe  and  Leather  Dealer.     Corunna,  115.
Wheeler,  James  B.,  Postmaster  and  Banker.     Secty.,  Corunna,  115.
Wilcox,  George,  Druggist,  Grocer,  and  Contractor.     Corunna,  115.
Wild,  John  L.,  Shaving  and  Hair  Dressing  Saloon.     Corunna,  115.
DETROIT.
Friesner,  Isaiah,  Traveling  Wholesale  Dealer  in  Watch  Materials.  Western
Union,  146,  N.  Y. ;  Genesee  River  chap.,  152,  N.  T. ;  R.  and  S.  Master ;  Alle-
ghany com.,  12.
FENTONVILLE,  Genesee  County.
Ayers,  M.,  Insurance  Agent  and  Forwarding  Merchant.  Past  and  Present
W.  M.,  Fentonville,  109  ;  Washington  chap.,  15.
Cook,  0.  G.,  Flour  Manufacturer.     Fentonville,  109.
Dibble,  Joel,  Teamster.    J.  D.,  Fentonville,  109.
Gaines,  Thomas,  Mercantile  Clerk.     Fentonville,  109.
Horton,  Dexter,  Commission  and  Forwarding  Merchant.  Secretary,  Fenton-
ville, 109.
Kenyon,  Frank  P.,  Mercantile  Clerk.     Fentonville,  109.
Wilmot,  George  W.,  Druggist  and  Grocer.     Pontiac,  21;  Oakland  chap.,  5.
Wilover,  H.  A.,  Dry  Goods  and  Groceries.     Fentonville,  109.
GBABTD  BAFIDS,  Kent  County.
Benedict,  Ed.  D.,  Telegraph  Operator.  W.  M.,  Valley  City,  86;  Grand
Eapids  chap.,  7 ;  Thrice  111.  G.  M.,  Tyre  coun.,  U.  D. ;  P.  E.  C,  De  Molay
com.,  5.
Church,  Benj.  B.,  Meat  Market.  W.  M.,  Grand  River,  34 ;  P.  K.,  Grand
Rapids  chap.,  7  ;  De  Molay  com.,  5 ;  Past  J.  G.  W.  of  Grand  Lodge.
Collins,  R.  M.,  Flour  and  Produce  Dealer.  Grand  River,  34 ;  Grand  Rapids
chap.,  7.
Coon,  Denby  L.,  R.  R.  Clerk.    Ionia,  36  ;  Ionia  chap.,  14.
Lyon,  T.  H.,  retired  from  business.  Deputy  Grand  Master,  Grand  Lodge;
P.  M.,  Grand  River,  34 ;  P.  H.  P.,  Grand  Rapids  chap.,  7 ;  Monroe  coun.,
1 ;  Gen.  De  Molay  com.,  5.
Morrison,  Lewis  C,  Attorney  at  Law  and  Solicitor  in  Chancery.  Secretary,
■Brand  River,  34.
Parks,  Chas.  P.,  Engineer  and  Machinist.    Valley  City,  86.
Porter,  Benj.  F.,  Grocer.  J.  W.,  Valley  City,  86  ;  G.  M.  of  3d  Veil,  Grand
Rapids  chap.,  7.
Reynolds,  Wm.  EC.,  Book-keeper.  Secretary,  Valley  City,  86  ;  G.  M.  2d  Veil,
Grand  Rapids  chap.,  7.
Valley  City  Lodge  meets  Tuesday  on  or  before  full  moon  each  month.
HILLSDALE,  Hillsdale  County.
Ames,  Jacob  O.,  Bookseller.  S.  W.,  Fidelity,  32 ;  H.  P.,  Hillsdale  chap.,  18;
Eureka  com.,  3.
Armstrong,  Jno.  H.,  Hide's  and  Leather.  Fidelity,  32 ;  Washtenaw  chap.,  6 ;
S.  W.,  Eureka  com.,  3.

--- Sayfa 233 ---
MICHIGAN.  221
Burnhehner,  Elias,  Clothing  Merchant.  Fidelity,  32 ;  Steward,  Hillsdale
chap.,  18;  Jonesville  com.,  5.
Evans,  Geo.  D.,  Hillsdale  House.    Fidelity,  32.
Farnam,  H.  T.,  Druggist  and  Grocer.  P.  M.,  Fidelity,  32  ;  King,  Hillsdale
chap.,  18 ;  P.  B.  0.  Eureka  com.,  3.
French,  Franklin,  Physician  and  Surgeon.  P.  M.,  Fidelity,  32  ;  P.  H.  P.,
Hillsdale  chap.,  18 ;  E.  0.,  Eureka  com.,  3  :  P.  G.  K.,  G.  0.,  Michigan.
Mosher,  Wm.  J.,  Mercantile  Clerk.     Fidelity,  32.
Potter,  Wm.,  retired  from  business.     Fidelity,  32  ;  Jonesville  chap.,  8.
Eowe,  Richard,  Merchant  Tailor.  J.  W.,  Fidelity,  32 ;  S.,  Hillsdale  chap.,
18  ;  Jonesville  coun.,  5  ;  Past  E.  C,  Eureka  com.,  3.
Rowlson,  H.  W.,  Hillsdale  Standard.     Fidelity,  32.
Shattuck,  L.  B.,  Merchant.  Treasurer,  Fidelity,  32 ;  R.  A.  C,  Hillsdale  chap.,
18 ;  Jonesville  coun.,  5  ;  Eureka  com.,  3.
Strunk,  Peter,  Strunk's  Hotel.    Fidelity,  32  ;  Hillsdale  chap.,  18.
Warren,  Geo.  W.     Fidelity,  32.
Welper,  N.  B.,  Hillsdale  County  Democrat.     Fidelity,  32  ;  Hillsdale  chap.,  18.
Whelan,  Arvin  F.,  M.D.  P.  S.  W.  and  Secretary,  Fidelity,  32  ;  Hillsdale
chap.,  18 ;  Prelate,  Eureka  com.,  3.
Wilson,  E.  H.  C,  Judge  Circuit  Court.  W.  M.  Fidelity,  32 ;  P.  H.  P.  Hills-
dale chap.,  18.
HUDSON,  Lenawee  County.
Barse,  Wm.  B.,  Hardware  Merchant.     Maxson,  26.
Beach,  F.  D.,  Cooper.     Maxson,  26.
Beach,  H.,  Boot  and  S-hoe  Dealer.     Maxson,  26.
Bean,  John,  Mechanic.     Treasurer,  Maxson,  26.
Canniff,  Enos,  Lumber  Dealer.     Maxson,  26.
Chamberlin,  D.  P.,  Physician.     W.  M.,  Maxson,  26  ;  Adrian  chap.,  10,
Farnam,  J.  B.,  Druggist  and  Express  Agent.  Secretary,  Maxson,  26  ;  Adrian
chap.,  10  ;  Eureka  com.,  3.
Galatin,  Albert,  Book-keeper.     J.  D.,  Maxson,  26.
Gillett,  R.  M.,  Merchant.     Maxson,  26.
Grenell,  H.  W.,  Merchant.  S.  W.,  Maxson,  26  ;  Jonesville  chap.,  8  ;  Eureka
com.,  3.
Gridley,  E.,  Cooper.     Tyler,  Maxson,  26.
Harris,  Caleb,  Mercantile  Clerk.     Maxson,  26.
Mosher,  Louis,  Mercantile  Clerk.     J.  Moors,  95.
Piper,  Robt.  B.,  Blacksmith.  P.  M.,  Maxson,  26  ;  Adrian  chap.,  10 ;  Eureka
com.,  3.
Sawdy,  Orris  S.,  Mercantile  Clerk.     Maxson,  26.
Walton,  E.  J.,  Dairyman  and  Farmer.     Maxson,  26.
IOMTA,  Ionia  County.
Axtell,  Charles  H,  Operative  Mason.     J.  W.,  Ionia,  36.
Bartlett,  Benj.  F.,  Boot  and  Shoe  Dealer.    Ionia,  36.
Blanchard,  John  0.,  Attorney  and  Counselor.     Lowell,  90  ;  Ionia  chap.,  14  ;
De  Molay  com.,  5.
Bliss,  Z.  E.,  M.D.    W.  M.,  Ionia,  36  ;  Scribe,  Ionia  chap.,  14.

--- Sayfa 234 ---
222  world's  masonic  register.
Dexter,  John  C,  Flour  Manufacturer  and  Produce  Dealer.  P.  S.  W.,  Ionia,
36  ;  Ionia  chap.,  14.
Puller,  Albion,  Boot  and  Shoe  Dealer.     Ionia,  36.
Hall,  Fred.,  Land  Agent.  S.  W.,  Ionia,  36  ;  P.  H.  P.,  Ionia  chap.,  14 ;
Monroe  coun.,  1 ;  De  Molay  com.,  5 ;  P.  D.  G.  H.  P.  of  Grand  Chap.
Ionia  Lodge,  No.  36,  meets  Wednesday  on  or  before  full  moon.
Irish,  David,  Postmaster  and  Grocer.  P.  S.  W.,  Ionia,  36 ;  Bang,  Ionia
chap.,  14.
Kennedy,  James,  Insurance  Agent.  P.  Secretary,  Ionia,  36  ;  Secretary,  Ionia
chap.,  14.
Mann,  Loomis,  Tin  and  Stove  Dealer.    J.  D.,  Ionia,  36.
Smith,  Joel,  Merchant.    Ionia,  36.
Taylor,  P.  H.,  Architect  and  Builder.  P.  M.,  Ionia,  36;  P.  K.,  Ionia
chap.,  14.
Wilson,  Geo.  W.,  Deputy  U.  S.  Marshal.  P.  M.,  Ionia,  36  ;  H.  P.  Ionia
chap.,  14 ;  De  Molay  com.,  5  ;  Grand  Recorder  of  Grand  Com.,  Michigan.
JOBTESVILLE,  Hillsdale  County.
Nimocks,  B.,  Justice  of  the  Peace,  Insurance  and  General  Collecting  Agent.
Secretary,  Lafayette,  16 ;  H.  P.  Jonesville  chap.,  8 ;  Becorder,  Jonesville
coun.,  5.
LAKE  POET,  St.  Clair  County.
Beaton,  H.  A.,  Merchant.    Pine  Grove,  11.
LOWELL,  Kent  County.
Blake,  Charles  A.,  Merchant.    Lowell,  90.
Chapman,  Jacob,  Merchant.    Lowell,  90.
Conant,  0.  L.,  Saloon-keeper.     Cuba,  306,  New  Tork.
Daniels,  Thomas,  Grocer.     W.  M.,  Lowell,  90.
Hooker,  C.  S.,  Postmaster  and  Merchant.     P.  J.  and  S.  W.,  Lowell,  90 ;
Grand  Rapids  chap,,  7  ;  De  Molay  com.,  5.
Shear,  John  B.,  Lumber  Merchant.    J.  W.,  Lowell,  90.
Stevens,  B.  M.,  Proprietor  Lowell  House.     Greenville,  96  ;  Ionia,  14
Vanderburgh,  A.  C,  Druggist.     Lowell,  90.
White,  Isaac  N.,  Boot  and  Shoe  Dealer.     Treasurer,  Lowell,  90.
Winegar,  B.  M.,  Miller.     P.  J.  D.,  Lowell,  90.
LYON'S,  Ionia  County.
Browsseau,  Julius,  Teacher.     Lyons,  37.
Burns,  James  W.,  Butcher.     Lyons,  37  ;  Ionia  chap.,  14.
French,  Geo.  W.,  Carpenter  and  Joiner.     Ionia,  36.
Hugg,  Wm.  M.,  M.D.,  Boot  and  Shoe  Dealer.    S.  D.,  Lyons,  37.
Lyons  Lodge,  No.  37,  meets  Monday  on  or  before  fall  moon  each  month.
Reynolds,  John,  Proprietor  Muir  Hotel.    Ionia,  36  ;  Ionia  chap.,  14.
Rickey,  Joseph,  Merchant.    Treasurer,  Lyons,  37.
Smith,  S.  M.,  Lumber  Dealer.    Lyons,  37 ;  Ionia  chap.,  14 ;  De  Molay  com.,  5.

--- Sayfa 235 ---
MICHIGAN.  223
Spaulding,  D.  0.,  Physician  and    Surgeon.    W.  M.,  Lyons,  37;    Battle
Creek  chap.,  19.
Staley,  Wm.  A.,  Dry  Goods,  Stationery,  etc.    Lyons,  37.
Tyler,  0.  L.,  Painter.    Lyons,  37.
Wagar,  H.  R.,  Druggist.     S.  W.,  Lyons,  37  ;  Jackson  chap.,  3.
IIONBOE.
Dansard,  B.,  Merchant  and  Banker.  J.  W.,  Monroe,  27  ;  0.  H.,  River  Raisin
chap  ,  22  ;  Recorder,  Monroe  com.,  4.
Grosvenor,  Ira  R.,  Counselor  at  Law.     W.  M.,  Monroe,  27.
Darrah,  Lewis,  Groceries  and  Provisions.     S.  W.,  Monroe,  27.
Oliver,  John  M.,  Druggist.  W.  M.,  Eureka,  107  ;  Adrian  chap.,  10  ;  Monroe
com.,  4.
Southworth,  Chas.  T.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.  Eureka,  107  ;  River  Raisin
chap.,  22.
OWOSSO,  Shiawassee  County.
Bagg,  Henry  C,  M.D.  and  Postmaster.     Owosso,  81.
Byerly  A.  H.,  Banker  and  Collector.     Owosso,  81.
Gregory,  E.  D.,  Hardware  Merchant.     S.  W.,  Owosso,  81.
Knill,  Henry,  Refreshment  Rooms,  D.  and  M.  Railway  Station.     Owosso,  81.
Leach,  Elisha,  M.D.  P.  M.,  Owosso,  81 ;  King,  Owosso  chap.,  U.  D. ;  J.  G.
W.  of  Grand  Lodge.
Lyon,  Wm.  J.,  Cooper.    Owosso,  81.
Moses,  C.  M.,  Dry  Goods,  Groceries,  etc.    Owosso,  81.
Owosso  Lodge,  No.  81,  meets  Wednesday  on  or  before  full  moon  each  month.
Quackenbush,  M.  W.,  Boot  and  Shoe  Dealer  and  Deputy  U.  S.  Marshal.  W.
M.,  Owosso,  81 ;  H.  P.,  Owosso  chap.,  U.  D.
Quackenbush,  Jay  L.,  Attorney  at  Law.     Secretary,  Owosso,  81.
Rixon,  Henry,  Civil  Engineer.     Owosso,  81.
Ross,  Collin,  Track  Master  D.  and  M.  Railway.     Owosso,  81.
Stewart,  R.  L.  and  M.  L.,  Grocers.     Owosso,  81.
Wait,  Daniel,  Butcher.     Owosso,  81.
Williams,  A.  L.,  President  of  Amboy,  Lansing  and  Traverse  Bay  R.  R.  P.
S.  W.  and  founder  of  Owosso,  81 ;  Scribe,  Owosso  chap.,  U.  D.
PIHCKNET,  Livingston  County.
Waggoner,  Edward  G.,  Wagon  and  Carriage  Manufacturer.    Livingston,  76.
POH'TIAC,  Oakland  County.
Darrow,  Prank,  Justice  of  the  Peace.  P.  M.,  Pontiac,  21  ;  H.  P.,  Oakland
chap.,  5  ;  T.  I.  G.  M.,  Pontiac  coun.,  3  ;  E.  C,  Pontiac  com.,  2  :  T.  I.  G.  Pur-
suivant, Grand  Coun. ;  E.  Grand  G.  of  G.  Com. ;  Grand  S.  of  G.  Chap. ;  P.  U.
P.  of.  G.  L.,  Michigan.
Denton,  S.  W.,  Postmaster.  Pontiac,  21 ;  G.  M.  of  2d  Veil,  Oakland  chap.,
5  ;  Pontiac  coun.,  3.
Elliott,  Richard  H.,  Druggist.  P.  J.  W.  Pontiac,  21 ;  G.  M.  of  3d  Veil,  Oak-
land chap.,  5 ;  Recorder,  Pontiac  coun.,  3.

--- Sayfa 236 ---
224  world's  masonic  register.
Foster,  John  P.,  Constable  and  T.  Treasurer.  S.  W.,  Pontiac,  21 ;  Oak-
land chap.,  5.
Fritz,  A.  T.,  Cabinet-maker  and  Undertaker.  J.  D.,  Pontiac,  21 ;  Oakland
chap.,  5.
Jewell,  Daniel,  Baker  and  Confectioner.     Pontiac,  21.
Kelly,  A.  S.,  Mercantile  Clerk.  Pontiac,  21 ;  G.  M.  3d  Veil,  Oakland  chap.,
5  ;  Pontiac  com.,  2.
Mathews,  A.  B.,  Flour  Manufacturer.  W.  M.,  Pontiac,  21 ;  King,  Oakland
chap.,  5  ;  P.  P.  C.  of  W.,  Pontiac  coun.,  3;  P.  B.  C,  Pontiac  com.,  2,
Turk,  Thomas,  Grocer.     Pontiac,  21 ;  Oakland  chap.,  5.
Waldo,  C.  0.,  Notary  Public  and  Land  Agent.     Pontiac,  21.
POKT  HUEON,  St.  Clair  County.
Ames,  Calvin,  Manufacturer  and  General  Dealer  in  Lumber,  Shingles,  etc.
Port  Huron,  58  ;  St.  Clair  chap.,  12  ;  St.  Clair  com.,  7.
Campbell,  A.  P.,  Lumberman.     Pine  Grove,  11.
Carleton,  I.  D.,  Land  Agent  and  Surveyor.     P.  S.  D.,  Port  Huron,  58.
Clark,  Frederick  R.,  Book-keeper.     Port  Huron,  58.
Congdon,  L.  M.,  Grocer.     Port  Huron,  58.
Crawford,  Alexander,  Engineer.     Port  Huron,  58.
Davidson,  James  A.,  Salesman.     Port  Huron,  58.
Field,  James  B.,  Hardware  Dealer.     Port  Huron,  58.
Goodman,  S.,  Clothing  Merchant.     Kalamazoo,  22.
Harris,  E.  W.,  Attorney  and  Notary  Public.  W.  M.,  Pine  Grove,  11;  St.
Clair  chap.,  12 ;  S.  W.,  St.  Clair  com.,  7.
Hassatt,  Matthew  Blannar,  retired  from  business.  Tyler,  Port  Huron,  58 ;  St.
Clair  chap.,  12.
Jenney,  James  A.,  Photographist.    S.  D.,  Port  Huron,  58  ;  St.  Clair  chap.,  12.
Larned,  Asa,  Proprietor  Larned  House.     Port  Huron,  58.
McKay,  Gilbert,  Grocery,  Provisions,  and  Produce,  etc.    Port  Huron,  58.
McNeil,  John,  Attorney  and  Collecting  Agent.     Port  Huron,  58.
Miles,  Cyrus,  Banker.     Port  Huron,  58.
Minne,  Joseph  P.,  Justice  of  the  Peace.  Port  Huron,  58  ;  St.  Clair  chap.,
12 ;  St.  Clair  coun.  No.  2  ;  Generalissimo,  St.  Clair  com.,  7.
Mitchell,  Wm.  T.,  Attorney  at  Law.  S.  W.,  Port  Huron,  58 ;  St.  Clair  chap.,
12  ;  Boyal  and  Select  Master;  St.  Clair  com.,  7.
Potter,  Geo.  H.,  Assistant  Postmaster.     Port  Huron,  58.
Potter,  H.  S.,  Postmaster  and  Publisher  Commercial.     Sec'ry,  Port  Huron,  58.
Scarritt,  J.  J.,  Proprietor  Port  Huron  Press.     Pine  Grove,  11.
Slusser,  George  M.,  Lumber  Inspector.     Port  Huron,  58.
Stillson,  John,  Lumberman.     Pine  Grove,  11.
Stockwell,  C.  M.,  M.D.    Port  Huron,  58.
Travers,  John  T.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.  P.  M.,  Pine  Grove,  11 ;  St.
Clair  chap.,  12.
Wastell,  Wm.,  Druggist.     P.  J.  W.,  Port  Huron,  58.
Wells,  Fred.  L.,  Manufacturer  and  Dealer  in  all  kinds  of  Lumber.  W.  M.,
Port  Huron,  58 ;  St.  Clair  chap.,  12  ;  Sword  Bearer,  S^  Clair  com.,  7.
Whitman,  David,  Flouring  and  Planing  Mills.     Pine  Grove,  11.

--- Sayfa 237 ---
MICHIGAN.  225
SABAMAC.
Pratt,  Elijah,  Miller.     Ionia,  36.
Stevens,  Ambrose  A.,  Merchant.  Watertown,  49,  N.  Y. ;  Watertown  R.  A.
chap.,  59 ;  Washington  coun.,  1,  N.  Y. ;  Watertown  com.,  11,  N.  Y.
STTTRGIS,  St.  Joseph  County.
Packard,  N.  I.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.  W.  M.,  Meridian  Sun,  49 ;  Centre-
ville  chap.,  11.
Page,  David,  firm  of  Page  &  Stow,  Furniture  and  Hardware  Dealers.  S.  W.,
Meridian  Sun,  49.
Pendleton,  E.  W.,  Proprietor  Exchange  Hotel.     Meridian  Sun,  49.
Putman,  Chas.  H.,  R.  R.  Agent.  P.  J.  W.,  Meridian  Sun,  49 ;  Centreville
chap.,  11 ;  Royal  and  Select  Master ;  Sov.  Prince  Royal  Secret,  32d.
ST.  JOHN'S,  Clinton  County.
Brainard,  W.  W.,  Cabinet-maker.     P.  M.,  St.  John's,  105 ;  R.  A.  Mason.
Hays,  James,  Freight  Agent.     Secretary,  St.  John's,  105.
Leech,  J.  E.,  Druggist  and  Grocer.    J.  W.,  St.  John's,  105.
Lucas,  J.  B.,  Stage  Agent.     St.  John's,  105  ;  Jackson  chap.,  3.
Plumstead,  Ransom,  Merchant.    W.  M.,  St.  John's,  105.
TECUMSEH.
Blanchard,  S.  Grand  Visitor  and  Lecturer;  P.  M.,  Centre  Lodge,  Rutland,
Vermont;  P.  King,  Green  Mountain  chap.,  Vermont ;  P.  E.  C,  Green  Mountain
com.,  3,  Vermont ;  P.  H.  P.,  Adrian  chap.,  10  ;  Initiated  Sept.,  a.l.  5818.
THEEE  EIVEKS,  St.  Joseph  County.
Bassett,  D.,  Boot  and  Shoe  Dealer.     Three  Rivers,  57.
Bassett,  I.  C.  P.  S.  D.,  Three  Rivers,  57  ;  C.  H.,  Salathiel  chap.,  23 ;  Three
Rivers  coun.,  7.
Bateman,  David  M.,  Hardware  Dealer.  J.  W.,  Three  Rivers,  57  ;  R.  A.  C,
Salathiel  chap.,  23  ;  Guard,  Three  Rivers  Coun.,  7.
Bingham,  Jay,  Druggist.     Three  Rivers,  57.
Boutwell,  R.  M.,  Groceries  and  Provisions.  Three  Rivers,  57 ,  Salathiel
chap.,  23.
Cole,  Ezra,  Banker  and  Produce  Dealer.  P.  M.,  Three  Rivers,  57;  H.  P.,
Salathiel  chap.,  23 ;  Three  Rivers  coun.,  7.
Cole,  H.  H,  Banker  and  Insurance  Agent.  P.  M.,  Three  Rivers,  57  .  Sec'y,
Salathiel  chap.,  23  ;  Recorder,  Three  Rivers  couo.,  7.
Cowling,  John,  Accountant.  W.  M.,  Three  Rivers,  57  ;  King,  Salathiel  chap.,
23 ;  P.  C.  of  W.,  Three  Rivers  coun.,  7.
Gilbert,  John,  Baggage  Master  M.  S.  and  N.  I.  R.  R.     Three  Rivers,  57.
Gillispie,  Geo.  W.,  Architect  and  Builder.  Treasurer,  Three  Rivers,  57;
Treasurer,  Salathiel  chap.,  23  ;  Three  Rivers  coun.,  7.
Griffiths,  Wm,  R.  R.  Clerk.  Secretary,  Three  Rivers,  57 ;  G.  M.  3d  Veil,
Salathiel  chap.,  23.
Hiles,  Joseph,  Architect  and  Builder.    P.  Treasurer,  Three  Rivers,  57.

--- Sayfa 238 ---
226  world's  masonic  register.
Hutchison,  0.  C,  Clothing  Manufacturer.     Three  Rivers,  57.
Lord,  D.  H.,  Banker  and  Dealer  in  Land  Warrants.  P.  M.,  Three  Rivers,
57  ;  Hillsdale  chap.,  18  ;  P.  J.  Grand  D.  of  G.  L.
Morse,  J.  C,  Agent  M.  S.  and  N.  I.  R.  R.  Three  Rivers,  57  ;  Scribe,  Sala-
thiel  chap.,  23 ;  Deputy  T.  I.  G.  M.,  Three  Rivers  coun.,  7.
Three  Rivers  Lodge,  57,  meets  Tuesday  on  or  before  full  moon.
Wheeler,  Wm.  E.,  Dry  Goods  Merchant.     Three  Rivers,  57.
TEENTON,  Wanye  County.
Jaquith,  Austin  E.,  Lumberman.     P.  S.  W.,  Trenton,  8.
WHITE  PIGEON,  St.  Joseph  County.
Comstock,  A.,  Mercantile  Clerk.     Secretary,  White  Pigeon,  104.
Dunwell,  Charles,  Agent  U.  S.  Express  and  R.  R.  White  Pigeon,  104;  Cen-
treville  chap.,  11 ;  R.  and  S.  Master.
Dunwell,  Chas.  B.,  R.  R.  Fireman.    White  Pigeon,  104.
Fox,  Jacob  J.,  R.  R.  Conductor.    White  Pigeon,  104 ;  Centreville  chap.,  11.
Hackenberg,  E.  L.,  firm  of  Hackenberg  &  Son,  Merchants.   White  Pigeon,  104.
Hotchins,  John,  Saddle  and  Harness.     White  Pigeon,  104.
Johnson,  J.  Eastman,  Attorney  at  Law,  Regent  of  State  University.  W.  31.,
White  Pigeon,  104 ;  P.  King,  Centreville  chap.,  11 ;  R.  and  S.  Master,  Grand
Secretary,  Grand  Chap.
Leonard,  Mike,  Track  Master.  S.  D.,  White  Pigeon,  104;  Centreville
chap.,  11.
May,  Col.  W.  J.,  Hotel  and  Eating  Saloon.  White  Pigeon,  104;  Centreville
chap.,  11.
Millis,  J.  W.,  R.  R.  Conductor.     White  Pigeon,  104.
White  Pigeon  Lodge,  104,  meets  Tuesday  on  or  before  full  moon.
Woodbery,  C.  C,  Postmaster  and  Justice  of  the  Peace.  S.  W.,  White
Pigeon,  104;  Centreville  chap.,  11.
In  1509,  on  the  accession  of  Henry  Till.,  Cardinal  Woolsey  was  appointed
Grand  Master,  and  notwithstanding  his  bad  conduct  in  other  respects,  he  was
very  attentive  to  the  concerns  of  the  fraternity,  who  prospered  under  his  adminis-
tration.
On  the  disgrace  of  the  Cardinal,  in  1530,  Cromwell,  Earl  of  Essex,  succeeded
as  Grand  Master.
Henry  VI.,  King  of  England,  was  made  a  Mason  in  1442.
Hume,  the  philosopher  and  historian,  was  a  Freemason.
Lavater,  the  celebrated  physiognomist,  was  a  Mason.
The  celebrated  Sir  Walter  Scott  was  a  Mason.
November  24th,  1790,  in  consequence  of  the  death  of  the  Duke  of  Cumber-
land, the  Prince  of  Wales  was  appointed  Grand  Master  of  England  in  his
place.

--- Sayfa 239 ---
MINNESOTA.
GRAND  LODGE,
The  Grand  Lodge  of  Minnesota  was  organized  February  23,  5853.  Its  Annual
Communications  are  held  in  the  City  of  St.  Paul,  commencing  on  the  fourth
Tuesday  in  October.  Its  membership  is  composed  of  the  Grand  Officers,  Past
Grand  and  Deputy  Grand  Masters,  and  Past  Grand  Wardens,  and  the  Masters
and  Wardens  of  its  subordinate  Lodges.  The  revenue  of  the  Grand  Lodge  is
derived  from  the  following  sources  : —
For  Dispensations  for  new  Lodges.  ....     $20  00
For  Charters,  in  addition
25  00
For  Dispensations  for  the  3  Degrees,  in  one  evening        .        5  00
For  Grand  Lodge  Diplomas    1  50
For  each  Degree  conferred
1  00
For  each  Member    50
For  every  Affiliation    50
Eegistry  of  every  Member  or  Mason  made.         .        .  10
A  correspondent,  in  forwarding  the  names  of  the  Grand  Officers  elect  during
the  session  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  in  October,  5860,  informs  us  that  there  are  31
subordinate  Lodges  in  Minnesota,  without  giving  us  the  names  and  locations  of
the  Lodges  organized  since  October,  5859,  at  which  time  there  were  23  Lodges
which  returned  786  Members,  84  Initiations,  and  3  Deaths.
The  Officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  elected  October,  5860,  are : —
A.  T.  C.  Piekson,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
D.  B.  Loomis,  B.  W.  Deputy  Grand  Master.
Jno.  O.  Whipple,  B.  W.  Senior  Grand  Warden.
C.  W.  Thompson,  B.  W.  Junior  Grand  Warden.
E.  Case,  E.  W.  Grand  Treasurer.
Geo.  W.  Peescott,  E.  W.  Grand  Secretary.
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.
No.       Lodge.
1  St.  John's,
2  Cataract,  ,
3  St.  Paul,
4  Hennepin,
Location.
Stillwater.
St.  Anthony.
St.  Paul.
Minneapolis.
5  Ancient  Landmark,  St.  Paul.
7  Dakota,  Hastings.
8  Red  Wing.  Red  Wing.
9  Faribault,  Faribault.
10  -Pacific,  St.  Paul.
Time  of  Meeting.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
2d  &  4th  Wednesd'ys.
2d  &  4th  Thursdays.
2d  &  4th  Wednesd'ys.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
Master.
L.  E.  Thompson.
M.  W.  Getchell.
G.  W.  Merrill.
E.  B.  Ames.
C.  W.  Carpenter.
C.  P.  Adams.
W.  W.  Phelps.
John  C.  Whipple.
N.  P.  Longford.
(227)

--- Sayfa 240 ---
228
WORLD'S   MASONIC  REGISTER.
No.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
11  Mantorville,  Mantorville.
12  Mankato,  Mankato.
14  Wapahasa,  Wabashaw.
16  Moutioello,  Moaticello.
17  Hokah,  Hokah.
18  Winona,  Winona.
19  Minneapolis,  Minneapolis.
21  Rochester,  Rochester.
22  Pleasant  Grove,  Pleasant  Grove.
26  Western  Star,  Albert  Lea.
27  Blue  Earth  Val'y, Winnebago  City.
28  Clear  Water,  Clear  Water.
29  La  Crescent,  La  Crescent.
30  Anoka.  Anoka.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
2d  &  4th  Wednesd'ys
Monday  before  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
1st  &  3d  Wednesd'ys.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Tu.  on  or  bef.  I.  m.
2d  &  4th  Weds.
Tu.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
Jas.  M.  Ryder.
.Lewis  Branson.
J.  J.  Stone.
Aug.  Merritt.
Edward  Thompson,
Jas.  S.  Campbell.
Joseph  Dean.
C.  C.  Jones.
Geo.  W.  Green.
A.  W.  White.
Loyal  Dudley.
W.  T.  Rigby.
J.  C.  Pennington.
Owen  Evans.
GRAND    CHAPTER.
Organized  December  17th,  5859.
This  Grand  Chapter  is  subordinate  to  the  General  Grand  Chapter.  It  has
under  its  jurisdiction,  so  far  as  we  are  advised,  3  subordinate  Chapters,  2  of
which,  at  the  Triennial  Convocation  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  in  September,
5859,  returned  107  members.
No.
Name.
Location.
1 Minnesota,
St.  Paul.
2 Vermillion,
Hastings.
SUBORDINATE   CHAPTERS.
No.  Name.
3     St.  Anthony  Falls,
Location.
St.  Anthony.
COMMANDERY.
There  is  one  Commandery  in  Minnesota,  Chartered  as  Damascus  Commandery,
No.  1,  September,  1856,  located  at  St.  Paul.  At  the  Triennial  meeting  of  the
Grand  Encampment  of  the  United  States,  1859,  it  reported  33  members.
SUBSCRIBERS'  NAMES.
Cogshall,  E.  W.,  Architect  and  Builder,  Hastings.    Mount  Vernon,  64,  Ohio.
Narger,  Samuel,  Clerk,  Port  Ripley.     Hillsborough,  25,  Florida.
Pierson,  A.  T.  C,  Accountant,  St.  Paul.  P.  E.  S.,  32d  deg. ;  Grand  Master
of  Grand  Lodge  ;  T.  I.  G.  M.,  Minnesota  coun.,  R.  and  S.  Masters ;  M.  E.  H.
P.,  Minnesota  chap.,  1.
September  24th,  1793,  Gustavus,  King  of  Sweden,  was  initiated  into  Free-
masonry at  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Stockholm,  under  the  auspices  of  the  king,  his
uncle,  who  presided  as  Grand  Master.

--- Sayfa 241 ---
MISSISSIPPI.
GRAND  LODGE.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  Mississippi  was  organized  July  27th,  5818.  The  Annual
Communications  are  held  on  the  first  Monday  of  January,  at  the  City  of  Jack-
son, or  such  other  place  as  the  Grand  Lodge  determines.  Its  membership  is
composed  of  the  Grand  Officers,  Past  Grand  Officers,  Past  Masters,  and  Masters
and  Wardens  of  its  subordinate  Lodges.  The  revenue  of  the  Grand  Lodge  is
derived  from  the  following  sources  :—
For  Dispensations  for  new  Lodges  .        .         .        .        .  $20  00
For  Charter,  in  addition    20  00
For  every  Degree  conferred     .                 ....  1  00
For  every  Member    75
There  were  238  subordinate  Lodges  in  this  jurisdiction  in  January  last,  219
of  which  returned  the  following  work  for  the  past  year:  Initiations,  1115;
Passings,  981 ;  Eaisings,  971 ;  Admissions,  370 ;  Dimissions,  748  ;  Suspensions,
301;  Expulsions,  15;  Reinstatements,  161 ;  Deaths,  143.  Total  number  of  Mas-
ter Masons  reported,  9045.  The  19  Lodges  which  made  no  returns,  the  Grand
Secretary  estimates  the  membership  400,  which  would  make  the  actual  member-
ship within  the  jurisdiction  about  10,560.
Annual  dues  reported,  $8947  10.  The  annual  dues  of  the  remaining  19
Lodges  at  least  $400,  making  the  annual  revenue,  say  $9300.
The  Officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  for  the  present  year  are  : —
D.  Mitchell,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
W.  A.  Champlin,  R.  W.  Dep.  Grand  Master.
C.  T.  Bond,  R.  W.  Senior  Grand  "Warden.
N.  J.  Beckett,  R.  W.  Junior  Grand  Warden.
Rev.  Thomas  W.  Casket,  R  W.  Grand  Chaplain.
B.  S.  Tappan,  R.  W.  Grand  Treasurer.
Ro.  W.  T.  Daniel,  R.  W.  Grand  Secretary.
Thomas  J.  Sharpe,  R.  W.  Grand  Marshal.
Dent.  H.  Miles,  R.  W.  Senior  Grand  Deacon.
D.  R.  Pettit,  R.  W.  Junior  Grand  Deacon.
Walter  Dennay,  R.  W.  Grand  Sword  Bearer.
B.  Bowman,  R.  W.  Grand  Pursuviant.
A  Bobbins,  R.  W.  Grand  Tyler.
(229)

--- Sayfa 242 ---
230
world's  masonic  register.
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
1  Harmony,
2  Andrew  Jackson,
3  Washington,
5  Columbus,
16  Clinton,
17  Pearoe  B.  Tutt,
18  Quitman,
19  Leaf  River,
21  Raymond,
23  Pearl,
24  Lexington,
25  Gallatin,
26  Yieksburg,
28  Canton,
29  Coleman,
31  Grenada,
32  Aberdeen,
33  Oxford,
34  Olive  Branch,
35  Holly  Springs,
36  Carrollton,
37  Liberty,
40  Macon,
42  Yazoo,
43  Shady  Grove,
45  Salem,
47  Ripley,
48  Pythagorean,
49  Greensboro',
51  Hernando,
53  Lafayette,
54  Sterling,
55  Chulahoma,
56  Mississippi,
57  Harrison,
58  Thos.  Hinds,
59  Tappan,
60  St.  Albans,
61  Eureka,
62  Marion,
63  Asylum,
65  Silas  Brown,
66  Panola,
67  Houston,
68  Vannatta,
69  Holmesville,
Natchez.
Natchez.
Port  Gibson.
Columbus.
Clinton.
Benton.
Providence.
Monroe.
Raymond.
Jackson.
Lexington.
Gallatin.
Vicksburg.
Canton.
Brandon.
Grenada.
Aberdeen.
Oxford.
Williamsburg.
Holly  Springs.
Carrollton.
Liberty.
Macon.
Yazoo.
Shady  Grove.
Salem.
Ripley.
Middleton.
Greensboro'.
Hernando.
Quitman.
Paulding.
Chulahoma.
Rodney.
Garlandsville.
Fayette.
Brownsville.
Columbia.
Richland.
Marion.
Woodville.
Jackson.
Panola.
Houston.
Raleigh.
Holmesville.
1st  Saturday. ,
2d  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Friday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
4th  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
2d  Monday.
1st  Friday.
1st  Thursday.
Wed.  before  1st  Sat.
1st  Monday.
2d  Saturday.
3d  Monday.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Tuesday.
2d  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
Saturday  bef.  f.  m.
3d  Friday.
2d  Monday.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Monday.
1st  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
4th  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
4th  Saturday.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
3d  Monday.
1st  Wednesday.
3d  Friday.
2d  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
Charles  M.  Hillyer.
A.  R.  Tyler.
James  A.  Gage.
Stephen  A.  Brown.
Geo.  Stokes.
H.  Yandell.
J.  F.  Normon.
A.  McLemore.
H.  T.  T.  Dupree.
S.  P.  Baley.
Jas.  M.  Haynes.
D.  B.  Lowe.
J.  W.  M.  Harris.
A.  M.  Gunley.
E.  B.  Harvey.
Thos.  Hardeman.
Newton  J.  Beckett.
W.  H.  D.  Wendel.
H.  Gregory.
B.  S.  Fant.
W.  W.  Hart.
R.  D.  McDowell.
J.  J.  Beauchamp.
Ed.  Bowman.
J.  A.  Sturges.
W.  Thos.  Hamer.
J.  H.  Buchanan.
Thos.  E.  Buchanan.
T.  N.  Davis.
J.  0.  Lusher.
M.  L.  Moody.
Jas.  A.  Chapman.
B.  J.  Wallace.
Warren  R.  Dent.
Francis  B.  Loper.
Saml.  Bolls.
J.  J.  Birdsong.
Jacob  Barnes.
Jas.  H.  Douglas.
Wm.  B.  Andrews.
John  P.  Dillingham.
E.  P.  Russell.
M.  S.  Ward.
T.  W.  Blackwell.
Lewis  E.  Cook.
Geo.  Nicholson.

--- Sayfa 243 ---
MISSISSIPPI.
231
Lotion.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
70  Evening  Star,  Steen's  Creek.
71  Joseph  Warren,  New  Albany.
72  Wilson,  Enterprise.
74  Camden,  Camden.
75  Louisville,  Louisville.
76  Ebenezer,  Senatobia.
78  Westville,  Westville.
79  Eastern  Star,  Montioello.
80  Soott,  Hillsboro'.
81  Pontotoc,  Pontotoc.
82  Oakland,  Oakland.
83  Coffeeville,  Coffeeville.
84  De  Witt  Clinton,  Shongalo.
85  Pikeville,  Buena  Vista.
86  Mount  Moriah,  Black  Hawk.
87  Prairie,  Okolona.
88  Trinity,  Kosciusko.
89  Abert,  Starkville.
90  Belmont,  Belmont.
91  United  Friends,  Princeton.
93  Philadelphia,  Philadelphia.
95  Emory,  Emory.
97  Richmond,  Richmond.
98  Utica,  Utica.
99  N.  Mt.  Pleasant,  N.  Mt.  Pleasant.
100  De  Soto,  Cockrum.
101  Malone,  Palo  Alto.
102  Wayne,  Wayne  co.
103  Sharon,  Sharon.
104  Coahoma,  Friar's  Point.
105  Pearl  River,  Carthage.
106  Union,  Mt.  Carmel.
107  Bethel,  Palmer's  Springs.
108  Carrollville,  Carrollville.
110  Claiborne,  Rooky  Springs.
111  Moses  Cook,  Gainesville.
112  Bovina,  Bovina.
113  Hyland,  Warrenton.
114  Lowndes,  Columbus.
115  Byhalia,  Byhalia.
116  Corinth,  Corinth.
117  Unity,  Edward's  Depot.
118  Camargo,  Camargo.
119  Snowsville,  Blackwell.
120  Magnolia,  Biloxi.
121  Hill  City,  Vicksburg.
122  Tchula,  Tchula.
123  Oak  Ridge,  Oak  Ridge.
124  Thomastown,  Thomastown.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Friday.
4th  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Monday.
1st  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
4th  Saturday.
1st  Friday.
1st  Tuesday.
1st  Saturday.
William  Aills.
C.  T.  Bond.
H.  H.  Field.
J.  W.  Downs.
Jas.  M.  Davis.
W.  A.  Feeney.
G.  J.  D.  Funchess.
H.  Hampton  Bridges.
M.  D.  Graham.
R.  W.  Edmondson.
Geo.  P.  Boone.
F.  M.  Aldridge.
Saturday  bef.  f.  m.    Wiley  Kelly.
3d  Saturday.  L.  D.  Holliman.
1st  Saturday.  J.  M.  Johnson.
3d  Saturday.  Joseph  Bretney.
Saturday  bef.  f.  m.    C.  B.  Galloway.
3d  Friday.  W.  H.  Gunn.
2d  Saturday.  M.  N.  Phillips.
1st  Saturday.  A.  W.  Moseley.
3d  Saturday.  J.  S.  Lewis.
2d  Saturday.  H.  Gilliam.
1st  Friday.  A.  Marshall.
3d  Saturday.  John  C.  Nixon.
2d  Saturday.  John  C.  Warren.
1st  Saturday.  J.  C.  Culbertson.
1  st  Tuesday.  Jas.  P.  Deans.
1st  Saturday.  Geo.  H.  Anderson.
4th  Saturday.  B  F.  Comfort.
1st  Saturday.  C.  S.  Severson.
Friday  bef.  f.  moon.  Wm.  M.  Cotten.
1st  Saturday.  S.  H.  Walker.
3d  Saturday.  J.  R.  Greer.
2d  Thursday.  A.  J.  Taylor.
4th  Saturday.  S.  McClellan.
1st  Saturday.  R.  B.  Carre.
2d  Saturday.  J.  L.  Hebron.
1st  Saturday.  D.  Rawling  Pettit.
3d  Friday.  James  Miller.
4th  Monday.  F.  W.  Henry.
2d  Friday.  C.  W.  MoCard.
4th  Saturday.  E.  A.  Way.
2d  Friday.  R.  C.  Clark.
1st  Saturday.  R.  C.  Love.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.  Jas.  Fewell.
4th  Saturday.  Geo.  P.  Crump.
2d  Saturday.  J.  T.  McBee.
1st  Saturday.  F.  C.  Jones.
1st  Saturday.  G.  H.  Myrick.

--- Sayfa 244 ---
232
world's  masonic  register.
No.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
126  Solomon,
127  Friendship,
128  Tallaloosa,
1^9  Patton,
130  Alamutcha,
131  Fulton,
132  Water  Valley,
134  Lodi,
135  Greenwood,
136  Charles  Scott,
137  Falconer,
138  Mellen,
139  Castilian,
140  Benela,
141  Waterford,
142  Jacinto,
144  D.  Lipscomb,
145  Looxahoma,
146  Jefferson,
147  Bay  St.  Louis,
148  Lamar,
149  Orizaba,
151  Daleville,
152  Palmetto,
153  Pine  Bluff,
154  Polar  Star,
155  Hartford,
156  Harrisburg,
157  G.  Washington,
158  Jeremiah,
159  Cannon,
162  St.  John,
163  Vinton,
164  Carson,
165  Smithville,
166  Auburn,
167  Bay  Springs,
168  Homestead,
170  Benj.  Franklin,
171  Good  Hope,
172  Rienzi,
173  Bahala,
174  Adelphian,
176  Sartartia,
177  Robert  Burns,
178  Speight,
179  Tuscambia,
180  Chappel,
181  Concord,
Flewellin's  X  Roads.
Como.
Tallaloosa.
Lauderdale.
Alamutcha.
Fulton.
Water  Valley.
Lodi.
Greenwood.
Sandifer's  Mill.
Shoeboota.
Chunkeyville.
Durant.
Benela.
Waterford.
Jacinto.
Crawfordsville.
Looxahoma.
Scooba.
Shieldsboro'.
Lamar.
Orizaba.
Daleville.
Palmetto  M.E.Ch'r'h
Pine  Bluff.
Handsboro'.
Pittsboro'.
Harrisburg.
Charleston.
Horn  Lake.
West  Point.
Spring  Ridge.
Vinton.
Snow  Creek.
Smithville.
Auburn.
Bay  Springs.
Deasonville.
Meadville.
Good  Hope.
Rienzi.
Bahala.
Bellefonte.
Sartartia.
Kilimichael.
Cotton  Gin  Port.
Kossuth.
Liberty  Chappel
Union  Church.
4th  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
4lh  Monday.
2d  Friday.
On  or  before  f.  m.
Saturday  bef.  f.  m.
4th  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
4th  Saturday.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Friday.
3d  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
3d  Friday.
1st  Saturday.
.Friday  on  or  pr.  f.  m.
4th  Saturday.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
1st  Saturday.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
1st  Friday.
4th  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
Friday  bef.  2d  Sun.
4th  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
4th  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
2d  Wednesday.
1st  Saturday.
4th  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
Sat.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Friday.
2d  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
John  P.  McCrackin.
E.  F.  McGehee.
R.  K.  Byrd.
Wm.  S.  Patton.
J.  R.  McLausen.
A.  B.  Bullard.
F.  S.  Davidson.
Isham  P.  Trotter.
John  K.  Allen.
W.  S.  Ritnour.
W.  B.  Lindsey.
H.  B.  McGee.
W.  G.  McCreight.
Benj.  A.  Ford.
R.  A.  Hill.
Scott  Thompson.
Thos.  Lewers.
H.  C.  Robinson.
Julius  C.  Monet.
C.  W.  Winston.
W.  G.  McGill.
John  N.  Rhodes.
J.  S.  Kilpatrick.
J.  F.  Vance.
L.  L.  Davis.
A.  M.  Reasons.
J.  P.  Henderson.
Edwin  Armstrong.
Geo.  W.  Perkins.
Jesse  Ellis.
J.  J.  Smylie.
John  P.  Hampton.
J.  J.  Hicks.
C.  Dowd.
H.  Lowery.
H.  B.  Brown.
F.  M.  Beall.
Cornelius  Byrd.
D.  S.  McDonald.
John  W.  Stevens.
John  Guynes.
G.  M.  Berryhill.
Dent,  H.  Miles.
S.  C.  Bains.
R.  A.  Pennal.
John  F.  Anderson.
J.  A.  Thompson.
John  A.  Galbraitb.

--- Sayfa 245 ---
MISSISSIPPI.
233
No.
Time  of  Meeting.
-  Master.
182  Theodosia,  Sarepta.
183  Dawson,  Winchester.
184  El  Dorado,  Hohenlinden.
185  Rocky  Ford,  Rooky  Ford.
186  Sageville,  Sageville.
187  J.  M.  Howry,  Spring  Dale.
188  Marietta,  Marietta.
189  Long  Creek,  Eureka.
190  Centre,  Centre.
191  White  Plains,  Sebastol.
193  South  Union,  Pulaski.
194  Walnut  Hill,  Vioksburg.
195  Laurel  Hill,  Laurel  Hill.
196  Blutf  Springs,  Bluff  Springs.
197  Dover,  Dover.
198  Oak  Bowery,  Oak  Bowery.
200  Hebron,  Okokay.
201  Yockena,  Robina.
202  Pascagoula,  Pascagoula.
204  Big  Creek,  Wiggins  Chapel.
205  Websters,  Websteis.
206  Greenville,  Greenville.
207  Marshall,  Holly  Springs.
209  D.  Mitchell,  French  Camps.
210  Bolivar,  Prentiss.
211  Vienna,  Pineville.
212  Plattsburg,  Plattsburg.
213  Huntsville,  Huntsville.
214  Sincerity,  Holmesville.
215  Rising  Glory,  Osyka.
216  Peach  Creek,  Peach  Creek.
217  Wm.  P.  Mellen,  Mount  Pisgah.
218  Mooresville,  Mooresville.
219  Canaan,  Canaan.
220  Sparta,  Sparta.
221  Rankin,  Pelahatchee.
222  S.  B.  Stampley,  Mount  Carmel.
224  New  Hope,
225  Cooper,
226  Sylviarena,
227  Chapel  Hill,
228  Campbelltown,
229  Western  Star,
231  Summit,
232  Pattona,
233  Burnsville,
234  Chickasawhay,  De  Soto
235  Wm.  R.  Lackey,  Senatha.
237  Mt.  Pleasant,      Mount  Pleasant
New  Hope  Church.
Centre  Point.
Sylviarena.
Chapel  Hill.
Campbelltown.
Paris.
Summit.
Pattona.
Burnsville.
4th  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
Wed.  on  or  af.  f.  m.
4th  Friday.
2d  Saturday.
4th  Friday.
Last  Saturday.
3d  Friday.
4th  Saturday.
4th  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
Sat.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
2d  Saturday.
4th  Saturday.
4th  Saturday.
4th  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
Friday  after  f.  m.
4th  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
3d  Monday.
4th  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
4th  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
Sat.  on  or  aft.  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
Sat.  before  3d  Sun.
2d  Friday.
3d  Saturday.
On  or  before  f.  m.
2d  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
Saturday  b.  1st  Sun.
4th  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
Tues.  after  2d  Sat.
4th  Thursday.
3d  Friday.
3d  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
3d  Wednesday.
4th  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
W.  S.  Hudson.
Angus  Taylor.
W.  S.  Wormack.
B.  M.  Kilgore.
W.  J.  Berry.
L.  M.  Lawshe.
W.  J.  Reeves.
Peter  Hubberd.
D.  T.  Patterson.
Barney  Lewis.
A.  J.  Windham.
H.  S.  Seyms.
J.  M.  Hooper.
A.  G.  Noah.
J.  R.  Young.
W.  C.  Sansom.
Joseph  Graves.
R.  S.  Boyles.
Alfred  E.  Lewis.
E.  Huntley.
W.  P.  Loid,
W.  A.  Haycraft.
T.  W.  Harris.
H.  P.  Herring.
F.  A.  Montgomery.
W.  C.  Carr.
Willis  Kelly.
Wm.  L.  D.  White.
John  D.  Lamkin.
P.  P.  Wilson.
A.  L.  Lawson.
S.  F.  Billingsley.
A.  C.  Tatum.
L.  L.  Creag.
A.  T.  Foster.
J.  M.  Brooks.
Jacob  Stampley.
Saml.  Deloach.
F.  M.  Ware.
W.  K.  Flowers.
J.  M.  Hampton.
J.  U.  A.  Hughes.
T.  Mauldin.
J.  G.  King.
J.  B.  Jones.
J.  P.  Gray.
B.  J.  Morrison.
M.  S.  Harman.
J.  Stephens.

--- Sayfa 246 ---
234
world's  masonic  register.
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
MiSTJBB.
238  G.  M.  Hillyer,    Wheeling.
239  C.  T.  Bond,         Hickory  Flat.
240  Pass  Christian,   Pass  Christian.
241  Brookhaven,        Brookhaven.
242  Walnut  Grove,    Walnut  Grove.
243  Baldwin,  Marion  Station.
244  Jno.  A.  Quitman, Smithdale.
245  Hazlehurst,
246  Acacia,
247  Newton,
248  Eulogy,
249  Waynesboro',
250  Jonesboro',
Hazlehurst.
Terry.
Newton.
Eulogy.
Waynesboro'.
Jonesboro'.
1st  Saturday.
2d  Thursday.
2d  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
251  Double  Springs,  Double  Springs.
252  S.  R.  Adams,       Lake  Como.
253  New  Ireland,       New  Ireland.
254  Morton,  Morton.
255  T.  B.  Harris,      North  Mt.  Pleasant.
J.  T.  McGee.
P.  M.  Marnion.
T.  J.  Spencer.
J.  R.  Russell.
G.  Henderson.
J.  E.  Marsalrus.
W.  W.  Cook.
GRAND  CHAPTER.
The  Grand  Chapter  of  Mississippi  was  organized  May  18th,  5846.  This
Grand  Chapter  is  subordinate  to  the  General  Grand  Chapter.  Its  Annual  Con-
vocations are  held  at  the  Seat  of  Government  of  the  State,  commencing  on
"Wednesday  before  the  third  Monday  in  January.  It  has  66  subordinate  Chap-
ters under  its  jurisdiction,  58  of  which  made  returns,  which  exhibit  the  following
work:  Exaltations,  266;  Admitted,  72;  Dimitted,  150;  Suspended,  34;  Ex-
pelled, 9  ;  Died,  41 ;  number  of  Members,  2152.  The  membership  of  the  eight
Chapters  making  no  returns,  estimated  245.  Non-affiliated,  estimated  500.
Total  E.  A.  Masons  in  the  State,  2897.    Amount  of  receipts,  $2880  83.
SUBORDINATE  CHAPTERS.
No.     Name.
1  Natchez,
2  Clinton,
3  Vicksburg,
4  Columbus,
5  Wilson,
6  Jackson,
7  Magnolia,
8  Yazoo,
9  Lexington,
10  Canton,
11  Macon,
12  De  Witt  Clinton,
13  Euphemia,
14  Fayette,
Location.
Natchez.
Port  Gibson.
Vicksburg.
Columbus.
Holly  Springs.
Jackson.
Brownsville.
Yazoo  City.
Lexington.
Canton.
Macon.
Grenada.
Aberdeen.
Fayette.
Time  op  Meeting.
3d  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Friday.
2d  Thursday.
1st  Tuesday.
4th  Saturday.
3d  Monday.
2d  Thursday.
1st  Saturday.
3d  Monday.
4th  Thursday.
2d  Saturday.
4th  Saturday.

--- Sayfa 247 ---
MISSISSIPPI.
235
No.       Name.
LOOATION.
Time  op  Meeting.
15  Carrollton,
16  William  H.  Wilkinson,
17  Gallatin,
18  Shields,
19  Vernon,
20  Kosciusko,
21  Quitman,
22  Raymond,
23  Houston,
25  Marion,
28  Walker,
29  Washington,
30  Shongalo,
31  Decatur,
33  Lafayette,
34  Neshoba,
35  Charles  Scott,
36  Louisville,
37  Union,
40  Marshall,
41  Spring  Ridge,
42  Amite,
44  Tallahatchie,
45  Enterprise,
46  Carthage,
47  Camargo,
48  Ripley,
49  New  Albany,
50  Mount  Carmel,
51  George  Washington,
52  Patton,
53  Palo  Alto,
54  Zenith,
55  Bethesda,
56  Wright,
57  Carrollville,
58  Mt.  Salus,
59  Shoeboota,
60  Panola,
61  Eureka,
62  Garrott,
63  G.  W.  Perkins,
64  Dover,
65  Chickasaw,
66  Jacinto,
67  Euclid.
68  Byhalia,
69  Brandon,
Carrollton.
Woodville.
Gallatin.
Pontotoc
Vernon.
Kosciusko.
Hernando.
Raymond.
Houston.
Marion.
Como.
Cayuga.
Shongalo.
Decatur.
Oxford.
Philadelphia.
Olive  Branch.
Louisville.
Richmond.
N.  Mt.  Pleasant.
Spring  Ridge.
Amite.
Charleston.
Enterprisev
Carthage.
Camargo.
Ripley.
New  Albany.
Mount  Carmel.
Chulahoma.
Lauderdale  Springs,
Palo  Alto.
Handsboro'.
Palmer's  Springs.
Fie  well  in' s  X  Roads.
Carrollville.
Clinton.
Quitman.
Panola.
Richland.
Looxahoma.
Horn  Lake.
Dover.
Hohenlinden.
Jacinto.
Cockrum.
Byhalia.
Brandon. 16
4th  Friday.
Tuesday  near  full  moon.
1st  Friday.
1st  Wednesday.
Monday  on  or  af.  full  moon.
3d  Monday.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Friday.
1st  Saturday.
Wednesday  b.  3d  Saturday.
1st  Friday.
4th  Saturday.
3d  Thursday.
2d  Saturday.
3d  Monday.
8d  Friday.
1st  Monday.
2d  Monday.
3d  Monday.
3d  Thursday.
3d  Monday.
1st  Wednesday.
1st  Friday.
1st  Thursday.
3d  Saturday.
2d  Friday.
3d  Friday.
2d  Thursday.
1st  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
2d  Thursday.
4th  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
2d  Thursday.
2d  Saturday.
2d  Monday.
2d  Saturday.
3d  Friday.
2d  Friday.
3d  Thursday.
2d  Saturday.
4  th  Saturday;
1st  Friday.

--- Sayfa 248 ---
236
No.       Name.
world's  masonic  register.
Location.  Time  of  Meeting.
70  Scooba,
71  John  Hebron,
72  Dent  H.  Miles,
Scooba.
Bovina.
Satarlia.
3d  Wednesday.
4th  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
GRAND  COUNCIL.
Organized  5856.
This  Grand  Council  holds  its  Annual  Meetings  in  the  City  of  Yicksburg,  on
the  second  Monday  in  January.     It  has  28  subordinate  Councils  under  its
jurisdiction.    At  the  Annual  Meeting,  5860,  only  22  Councils  made  returns,
showing  722  members,  and  145  degrees  conferred.    Annual  dues  paid,  $290.
SUBORDINATE  COUNCILS.
No.        Name.
1  Natchez,
2  Vicksburg,
3  Woodville,
4  Lexington,
5  Jackson,
6  Gallatin.
7  Liberty,
8  W.  P.  Mellen,
9  Cayuga,
10  W.  H.  SteTens,
11  New  Albany,
12  Kosciusko,
13  Holly  Springs.
14  Alexander,
15  Panola,
16  Byhalia,
17  Hernando,
18  J.  M.  Coopwood,
19  Yazoo,
21  B.  Springer,
22  De  Soto,
23  Lackey,
24  Wm.  S.  Patton,
25  Raymond,
26  Pontotoc,
27  John  A.  Quitman,
28  Aberdeen,
Location.
Natchez.
Vicksburg.
Woodville.
Lexington.
Jackson.
Gallatin.
Liberty.
Carroll  ton.
Cayuga.
Grenada.
New  Albany.
Kosciusko.
Holly  Springs.
Chulahoma.
Panola.
Byhalia.
Hernando.
N.  Mount  Pleasant.
Yazoo.
Oxford.
Cockrum.
Marion.
Lauderdale  Springs.
Raymond.
Pontotoc.
Enterprise.
Aberdeen.
Time  of  Meeting.
4th  Saturday.
2d  Thursday.
1st  Friday.
2d  Monday.
1st  Saturday.
Tuesday  bef.  4th  Saturday.
1st  Friday.
1st  Thursday.
3d  Monday.
1st  Saturday.
Friday  after  1st  Thursday.
Friday  before  2d  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
GRAND    COMMANDERT.
Organized  January  22d,  1857.
The  Grand  Commandery  hold  its  Annual  Conclave  in  the  City  of  Yicksbnrg,
on  the  Friday  after  the  third  Monday  in  January.     The  latest  proceedings  re-

--- Sayfa 249 ---
Mississippi.  237
ceived  show  that  there  were  5  Oomraanderies  in  this  jurisdiction,  which  returned
216  members,  40  Orders  conferred,  5  Died,  and  25  Dimitted.  Amount  of  dues
paid,  $413.
SUBORDINATE  COMMANDBRIES.
Fo.       Name.
1  Mississippi,
2  Magnolia,
3  Lexington,
Location.                        No.       Name.
Jackson.                       4  Holly  Springs,
Vicksburg.                    5  Rosalie,
Lexington.
Location.
Holly  Springs,
Natchez.
SUBSCRIBERS'  NAMES.
ABERDEEN.
Boss,  Randolph  G.,  Sculptor.    Lowndes,  114 ;  Chap.,  13.
Smith,  Daniel,  Book-keeper.     P.  Sec'ry,  Tannehill,  116,  Tenn. ;  Aberdeen,  32  ;
King,  Chap.,  13 ;  Bee,  Aberdeen  coun.,  28.
ATTALA  COUNTY.
Boiling,  Wiley  B.,  Bridge  Builder.  (P.  0.  Goodman's  Depot,  Holmes  Co.)
Trinity,  88.
Russell,  John  Hopkins,  Engineer.  (P.  0.  Bluff  Springs.)  Bluff  Springs,
196.
Snider,  Benjamin,  House  Carpenter.      (P.  0.  Goodman's   Depot.)     W.  R.
Lackey,  235.
BURNSVILLE,  Tishemingo  County.
McMasters,  Jonathan.    Burnsville,  233.
Smith,  W.  A.    Jacinto,  142.
Walters,  J.  0.    Burnsville,  233.
EDWARDS'  DEPOT,  Hinds  County.
Barlow,  Arthur  K.     Unity,  117 ;  Raymond  chap.,  22.
GALLATIN,  Copiah  County.
Brown,  W.  J.,  Farmer.     Gallatin,  25.
Bulloch,  S.  J.  M.,  Farmer.  Gallatin,  25  ;  Mt.  Carmel  chap.,  50 ;  Gallatin
coun.,  6.
Deason,  W.  M.,  Physician.  Gallatin,  25 ;  Gallatin  chap.,  17  ;  Gallatin
conn.,  6.
Graves,  T.  A.,  Physician.     Shady  Grove,  42.
Johnson,  S.  J.,  Saddler.     Gallatin,  25.
Jones,  J.  Byron,  Farmer.  S.  W.,  Pattona,  232  ;  Scribe,  Gallatin  chap.,  17  ;
Gallatin  coun.,  6.
Lowe,  D.  B.,  Carpenter.    W.  M.,  Gallatin,  25.
Lowe,  G.  D.,  Carpenter.     Gallatin,  25.
McKay,  J.  W.,  Farmer.  S.  W.,  Gallatin,  25 ;  Gallatin  chap.,  17 ;  Utica
coun.,  non-affiliated.
McLemore,  Reuben,  Physician.  Gallatin  25 ;  Gallatin  chap.,  17 ;  Gallatin
coun.,  6.

--- Sayfa 250 ---
238  world's  masonic  register.
HAZLEHTTEST,  Copiah  County.
Chance,  John,  Farmer.  Hazlehurst,  243.
Goode,  M.  W.,  Farmer.  Hazlehurst,  243.
Hill,  T.  J.,  Farmer.    Hazlehurst,  243.
Johnston,  Oliver  H.,  Druggist.     Sec'y,  Hazlehurst,  243 ;  Gallatin  chap.,  17.
Martin,  John,  Farmer.     Hazlehurst,  243.
Miller,  W.  W.,  Mayor.     S.  and  T.,  Hazlehurst,  243.
Peyton,  E.  A.,  Teacher.    Hazlehurst,  243.
Bicker,  John,  Carpenter.  J.  D.,  Hazlehurst,  243  ;  Gallatin  chap.,  17  ;  Gal-
latin coun.,  6.
Russell,  Allen  J.,  Clerk.    Hazlehurst,  243.
HICKOBY  FLATS.
Martin,  H.  C,  Planter.     C.  T.,  Bond,  259;   New  Albany  chap.,  49;  New
Albany  coun.,  11.  <
HOLLY  SFBIN GS.
Bishop,  Willis  H.,  Clerk.  Sec'y,  Holly  Springs,  35 ;  Sec'y,  Wilson  chap.,  5 ;
Sec'y,  Holly  Springs  coun  ,  13.
Johnson,  Lawrence,  Clerk  of  District  Court.     Holly  Springs,  35;  Wilson,
chap.,  5  ;  Holly  Springs  coun.,  13 ;  Holly  Springs  com.,  4.
Scruggs,  J.  M.,  Attorney  at  Law.     Holly  Springs,  35.
JACINTO,  Tishemingo  County.
Bond,  W.  W.,  Clerk  of  Circuit  Court.    Jacinto,  142 ;  Sec'y,  Jacinto  ehap.,  6&.
JACKSON.
Daniel,  Ro.  W.  T.,  Hotel-keeper.  Walnut  Hill,  194;  Vicksburg  chap.,  3;
Vicksburg  coun.,  2  ;  Vicksburg  and  Mississippi  com.,  1 ;  Grand  Secretary  of
the  Grand  Lodge  and  Chapter,  and  Grand  Recorder  of  the  Grand  Council  and
Grand  Commandery  of  Mississippi.
JTTKA  SPKIN GS,  Tishemingo  County.
Hart,  W.  J.,  Merchant.
KOSCIUSKO.
,    Cone,  John  H.    Trinity,  88  ;  Kosciusko  chap.,  20 ;  Cayuga  coun.,  9.
Crosby,  Reuben,  Farmer.     Chapel,  180.
MAPLE  SPRINGS,  Lafayette  County.
Jeffries,  J.  H.,  Planter.    Rocky  Ford,  185 ;  Chap.,  5  ;  Coun.,  13;  Com.,  4.
NATCHEZ.
Hillyer,  Giles  M.    33d.-. ;  P.-.G.-.M.-.  and  G.-.H.-.P.-.,  Mississippi.
Mellen,  William  P.,  Attorney  and  Counselor  at  Law,  Solicitor  and  Com.  in
Chancery;  TJ.  S.  Com.  for  Southern  Dist.  of  Miss.;  P.  G.  M.  and  P.  GkS.
Grand  Lodge,  Miss. ;  P.  M.,  Harmony,  1 ;  P.  H.  P.,  Natchez  chap.,  1 ;  P-  D-
G.  M.,  Natchez  coun.,  1 ;  P.  G.  H.  P.,  Grand  Chapter  of  Miss. ;  M.  C,  Grand
Lodge  of  Perfection,  1 ;  G.  C.  of  Princes  of  Jerusalem ;  Sov.\  of  Sov.\  of  Con-
sistory of  A.-,  and  A.-.  R.  of  Miss. ;  Vernon  com.,  1,  Columbus,  Ohio.

--- Sayfa 251 ---
Mississippi.  239
new  albany-.
Bond,  0.  T.,  Merchant.    P.  M.,  Joseph  Warren,  71 ;  P.  H.  P.,  New  Albany
chap.,  49 ;  New  Albany  coun.,  3.
NORTH  MT.  PLEASANT.
Crawford,  James  W.,  Planter.    Mt.  Pleasant,  99  ;  J.  M.  Coopwood  coun.,  18.
OXPOED.
Houseman,  L.,  Merchant.     Oxford,  33 ;    Lafayette  chap.,  33 ;    Benjamin
Springer  coun.,  21.
Thompson,  Hon.  Jacob,  Secretary  of  Interior.     Oxford,  33.
PALO  ALTO.
Clarke,  Hiram  N.,  Merchant  and  Planter.     Malone,  101 ;  Palo  Alto  chap.,  53.
BIENZI,  Tishemingo  County.
Arnold,  John  F.,  Attorney  at  Law  and  Solicitor  in  Chancery.    Jacinto,  142  ;
H.  P.,  Jacinto  chap.,  66  ;  Liberty  coun.,  5,  La  Grange.
SATABTIA.
Barkley,  Bichard  Allen,  Planter  and  Overseer.     Satartia,  176.
Johnson,  Ben  Ward,  Planter.     Satartia,  176.
VICKSBUKG.
Cyoski,  Adolphe  P.,  Professor.     Washington,  3 ;  R.  A  C,  Clinton  chap.,  2  ;
Port  Gibson  coun.,  5.
YAZOO  CIT5T.
Stanford,  W.  L.    Yazoo,  42 ;  Yazoo  chap.,  8.
TRUE  PROGRESSION  OF  MASONRY.
Masonry  is  said  to  be  a  progressive  institution,  but  the  proper  meaning  of  the
expression,  or  in  what  it  is  progressive,  has  not  been  clearly  stated.  It  is  mostly
considered — when  in  its  outward  growth,  in  its  material  increase  and  success,
when  large  numbers  are  admitted  into  our  sanctuaries,  when  applications  for  new
Lodges  are  numerous,  when  the  funds  in  the  treasuries  accumulate  largely —
that  Masonry  is  progressing.  But  this  is  a  mistaken  view,  as  this  apparent
prosperity  may  be  the  result  of  proselytism,  a  desire  for  ostentation,  for  vain
boasting ;  which,  instead  of  adding  strength  to  the  Masonic  edifice,  may,  from
the  material  admitted  without  inspecting  its  qualities  closely,  and  selecting  it
with  proper  cave,  and  a  regard  for  the  high  purposes  for  which  it  is  intended,  be
the  very  means  to  eventuate  in  the  destruction  of  the  institution.  In  times  of
prosperity  such  as  the  present,  when  Masonry  is  popular  everywhere,  and  ap-

--- Sayfa 252 ---
240  world's  masonic  register.
plicants  are  constantly  knocking  at  our  doors,  seeking  to  be  admitted  into  the
institution,  and  to  become  acquainted  with  our  mysteries,  greater  vigilance  and
circumspection  should  be  exercised,  lest  incongruous,  inharmonious,  and  impro-
per persons  be  permitted  to  enter  into  the  household  of  the  faithful,  and  destroy
the  peace  and  unity  of  the  Order.  The  mere  accession  of  numbers  is  not  a  test
of  strength,  nor  is  it  an  evidence  of  the  development  of  the  principles  of  Ma-
sonry. The  true  progression  of  Masonry  is  in  the  living  and  acting  up  to  the
principles  of  the  Order.  Masonry  can  only  be  said  to  be  progressive  when  it
moves  on  iD  advance  of  the  morals  and  intelligence  of  the  age,  and  directs  the
onward  march  of  civilization.  This  Masonry  must  do,  or  it  fails  to  perform  its
true  mission.  The  standard  of  its  morals  must  be  so  elevated  that  the  surround-
ing world  can  see,  and  know,  and  feel  its  beneficial  and  sanctifying  influence.
And  as  dispensing  light  and  knowledge  is  particularly  a  province  of  Masonry,  a
due  culture  of  the  mental  powers  is  necessary  to  a  proper  understanding  of  the
laws  of  nature  and  of  nature's  God,  to  develop  the  arts  and  sciences,  and  to  aid
man  in  working  out  the  problem  of  his  mission,  and  assisting  bim  to  promote
his  intellectual  and  spiritual  advancement.  AVe  do  not  claim  for  Masonry  more
than  its  principles,  if  lived  up  to  in  the  actual  outworking  of  life,  will  accomplish,
and  which  was  the  design  of  the  originators  of  the  Order.  Founded  upon  better
principles  than  any  other  institution,  and  in  its  fraternal  objects  in  advance  of
the  church,  Masonry  has  accomplished  more  in  allaying  prejudices,  in  promot-
ing kindly  feelings,  in  drawing  the  bonds  of  union  closer,  in  reconciling  man  to
his  condition,  in  cementing  fellowship,  in  establishing  good  faith,  in  cultivating
harmony,  in  the  true  manifestation  of  sympathy,  affection  and  love,  than  all  the
efforts  of  the  pulpit  and  rostrum,  and  other  beneficial  and  charitable  associa-
tions. It  is  only  by  living,  acting,  doing,  according  to  its  teachings,  that  the
principles  of  Masonry  are  unfolded,  and  exercise  an  influence  in  promoting  the
happiness  and  well-being  of.  the  surrounding  world.  The  stability  and  future
existence  of  the  institution  depend  upon  a  strict  and  faithful  observance  of  its
teachings.  Masonry  can  only  be  known  by  its  fruits.  It  has  no  life,  no  vitality,
if  it  does  not  progress  onward  and  upward.  It  cannot  remain  stationary.  It
must  either  progress  or  retrograde.  It  does  retrograde  if  its  principles  are  not
patent  to  the  observation  of  the  world  in  the  intelligence  and  exemplary  life  of
its  members.  The  true  progression  of  Masonry  is  the  manifestation  of  good
deeds,  of  good  works,  the  practice  of  its  teachings  by  its  disciples.
Inigo  Jones,  who  was  denominated  "the  father  of  classical  architecture  in
England,"  was  born  1572,  and  died  in  1G52,  at  the  age  of  79  years.
May  1,  1775,  the  foundation-stone  of  the  new  Freemason's  Hall,  in  London,
was  laid  in  solemn  form,  in  the  presence  of  a  numerous  company  of  the  brethren.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  at  its  meeting,  May  1,  1775,  instituted  the
office  of  Grand  Chaplain,  which,  although  an  innovation  and  inconsistent  with
the  universal  principles  of  Freemasonry,  has  been  almost  universally  adopted,
to  give  character  to  the  institution.
May  23,  1776,  the  new  Freemason's  Hall,  in  London,  was  dedicated  to  Ma-
sonry, virtue,  and  universal  charity  and  benevolence.

--- Sayfa 253 ---
MISSOURI.
GRAND  LODGE.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  Missouri  was  organized  April  23d,  5821.  Its  Annual
Communications  are  held  in  the  City  of  St.  Louis,  commencing  on  the  fourth
Monday  in  May.  The  Grand  Lodge  consists  of  the  Grand  Officers,  Past  Grand
and  Past  Deputy  Grand  Masters,  Past  Grand  Wardens,  Past  Grand  Treasurers,
Past  Grand  Secretaries,  Past  Masters,  and  Masters  and  Wardens  of  its  sub-
ordinate Lodges.  The  revenue  of  the  Grand  Lodge  is  derived  from  the  follow-
ing sources : —
For  Dispensations  to  form  new  Lodges    ....    $20  00
For  Charters,  in  addition
10  00
For  each  member    50
For  each  degree  conferred    1  00
The  latter  fee  is  applied  exclusively  for  the  boarding,  clothing,  etc.,  of  orphans
of  deceased  Master  Masons  who  were  affiliated  and  in  good  standing  within
the  jurisdiction.
There  are  205  subordinate  Lodges  in  Missouri,  193  of  which  reported  at  the
Annual  Communication  of  the  Grand  Lodge  in  May,  5860,  6862  members.
Initiated  the  past  year,  883;  Passed,  761;  Raised,  725;  Admitted,  530;
Dimitted,  309;  Died,  68  ;  Suspended,  77 ;  Expelled,  41.  Receipts  of  the  Grand
Lodge  from  27th  of  May,  5859,  to  June  7th,  5860,  $8621  48.
The  Officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  for  the  present  Masonic  year  are  : —
Marcus  H.  McFarland,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
W.  B.  Penick,  E.  W.  D.  Grand  Master.
John  Decker,  W.  Senior  Grand  Warden.
Samuel  M.  Hats,  W.  Junior  Grand  Warden.
John  D.  Daggett,  W.  Grand  Treasurer.
A  O'Sullivan,  W.  Grand  Secretary.
P.  Draper,  Senior  Grand  Deacon.
A.  L.  McGregor,  Junior  Grand  Deacon.
A.  Stille,  Grand  Tyler.
The  following  sketch  of  the  early  history  of  Freemasonry  in  Missouri  is  from
the  pen  of  the  intelligent  and  accomplished  Grand  Secretary  of  the  Grand
Lodge,  K.  W.  Bro.  A.  O'Sullivan.
"I  presume  it  is  well  known  that  the  first  settlers  of  Upper  Louisiana  (as
this  State  was  formerly  called)  were  French ;  they  came  by  the  way  of  Canada,
and  were  the  companions  of  Cartier,  La  Salle,  and  Father  Hennepin,  who,  with
a  perseverance  and  courage  seldom  surpassed,  traversed  the  vast  wilderness  that
(241)

--- Sayfa 254 ---
242  world's  masonic  register.
then  lay  between  the  Canada  line  and  the  French  settlements  on  the  Lower
Mississippi.
"  To  connect  her  Canadian  with  her  Southern  possessions  on  the  Mississippi,
was  a  favorite  scheme  with  France,  and,  in  order  to  effect  this,  she  caused  a
chain  of  military  posts  to  be  established  along  the  Lakes,  and  the  Ohio  and
Mississippi  Bivers.  Between  these  posts  settlements  rapidly  sprung  up,  one  of
which,  the  town  of  Ste.  Genevieve,  was  of  some  importance  as  early  as  1 763 ;
here  was  concentrated  the  lead  trade,  as  also  a  trade  in  furs  and  peltries.
"In  November  of  the  above  year,  Pierre  Liguste  Laclede,  who  had  received
from  the  Director-General  the  exclusive  privilege  to  trade  with  the  Indians  of
Missouri  and  those  west  of  Mississippi,  arrived  at  Ste.  Genevieve ;  but  finding
no  place  suitable  for  the  storage  of  his  goods,  and  being  still  too  far  from  the
mouth  of  the  Missouri  Biver,  a  proximity  to  which  was  an  object  of  primary
importance  to  him,  he  proceeded  up  the  Mississippi  Eiver.
"  On  the  15th  of  February,  1764,  Laclede  and  his  party  landed  at  the  spot
now  occupied  by  the  City  of  St.  Louis,  and  proceeded  to  cut  down  trees  and
draw  the  lines  of  a  town  which  he  named  St.  Louis,  in  honor  of  Louis  XV.  of
France ;  a  town  which  subsequently  became  the  capital  of  Upper  Louisiana!
and  which  is  now  the  commercial  capital  of  Missouri.
"  The  merchants  of  Ste.  Genevieve  and  St.  Louis,  in  the  days  of  which  I  write
procured  their  goods  from  Philadelphia,  to  which  city  they  resorted  once  in
every  year.  Here  several  of  them  became  Masons,  and  were  made  in  the  Old
French  Lodge,  No.  73  on  the  Eegistry  of  the  G.  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania.
"  In  process  of  time,  as  the  Masons  in  the  Territory  became  numerous,  they
resolved  to  form  a  Lodge;  and,  on  proper  application,  in  the  year  1807-8,  a
warrant  of  Constitution  was  granted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania,  for
a  Lodge  to  be  holden  in  the  town  of  Ste.  Genevieve,  Territory  of  Louisiana,  and
is  registered  on  the  books  of  said  Grand  Lodge  as  Louisiana  Lodge,  No.  109 :
Otho  Strader  being  its  first  Master,  Dr.  Aaron  Elliott  and  Joseph  Hertick,
Wardens.     This  was  the  first  Lodge  established  in  the  now  State  of  Missouri.
"  In  the  years  1811-12,  Gen.  H.  Dodge  presided  over  this  Lodge  as  W.  M.
Owing  to  the  unsettled  state  of  the  Territory  during  the  late  war  with  England,
the  Lodge  declined,  and  it  finally  ceased  to  work  about  the  years  1816-17.  I
am  led  to  this  belief  because  no  mention  is  made  of  it  in  the  early  records  of  the
Grand  Lodge,  and  also  from  the  fact  that  in  the  year  1826  several  Brethren
petitioned  for  a  Lodge  to  be  held  in  the  town  of  Ste.  Genevieve,  by  the  name  of
Tucker  Lodge,  which  Lodge  was  chartered  as  No.  13,  and  continued  in  exist-
ence until  1831,  when  it  went  down.  In  the  year  1809-10,  a  Charter  was
granted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania,  to  certain  Brethren  in  the  town
of  St.  Louis,  to  open  St.  Louis  Lodge,  No.  111.  Of  this  Lodge  I  am  unable
to  procure  the  least  information  who  its  officers  were  or  when  it  ceased  to  exist.
A  Dispensation  for  a  Lodge  at  the  town  of  Jackson,  now  in  the  county  of  Cape
Girardeau,  was  granted  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Indiana,  in  the  year  1820,  but
was  chartered  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  this  State.
"A  Charter,  bearing  date  8th  of  October,  1816,  was  granted  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Tennessee  to  Josiah  Pilcher,  Thomas  Brady,  Jeremiah  Connor  and
others,  to  open  a  Lodge  in  the  town  of  St.  Louis,  Missouri  Territory,  by  the
name  of  Missouri  Lodge,  No.  12,  and  is  signed  by  Kobt.  Searcy,  G.  Master;
AVilkins  Tannehill,  G.  Sec.

--- Sayfa 255 ---
Missouri.  243
"A  Charter  bearing  date  6th  of  October,  1819,  was  granted  to  Wm.  F.
Eoberts,  S.  Converse,  Wm.  Bates,  and  others,  to  open  a  Lodge  in  the  town  of
Herculaneum,  by  the  name  of  Joachim  Lodge,  No.  25,  and  is  signed  by  Oliver
Hayes,  G.  M. ;  Moses  Norvell,  G.  Secretary.
"  A  Charter,  same  date  and  year,  was  granted  to  Benjamin  Emmons,  B.
Palmer,  John  Payne,  and  others,  to  open  a  Lodge  in  the  town  of  St.  Charles,
by  the  name  of  St.  Charles  Lodge,  No.  28.
"On  the  22d  day  of  February,  1821,  in  pursuance  of  an  invitation  sent  by
Missouri  Lodge,  No.  12,  to  the  several  Lodges  in  the  State,  the  following
Lodges,  by  their  representatives,  assembled  in  the  Hall  of  Missouri  Lodge,  No.
12,  in  the  town  of  St.  Louis,  and  having  resolved  to  organize  a  Grand  Lodge  for
th%  State  of  Missouri,  appointed  a  committee,  consisting  of  Bros.  Wm.  Bates,
Nathaniel  Simmons,  and  Edward  Bates,  to  draft  a  Constitution  and  Code  of
By-Laws  for  the  Government  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  and  then  adjourned  to  meet
at  the  same  place  on  the  twenty-third  day  of  April  following,  to  organize  a
Grand  Lodge.
"A  Convocation  of  Masons  met  pursuant  to  previous  notice  given  by  the  Con-
vention of  Delegates,  at  the  Lodge  Boom  of  Missouri  Lodge,  No.  12,  April  23,
a.l.  5821,  for  the  purpose  of  organizing  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  State  of
Missouri.
"  Opened  in  the  Third  Degree  in  due  form.
"  Present — W.  Edward  Bates,  M.,  p.  t. ;  James  Kennerly,  S.  W.,  p.  t. ;  Wm.
Bates,  J.  W.,  p.  t. ;  Abra'm  Beck,  Sec,  p.  t. ;  Joseph  V.  Gamier,  Treas.,  p.  t. ;
Isaac  A.  Letcher,  S.  D.,  p.  t. ;  Joseph  White,  J.  D.,  p.  t. ;  John  C.  Potter,
Tyler,  p.  t.
"Eepresentatives — Missouri  Lodge,  No.  12,  Edward  Bates ;  Joachim  Lodge,
No.  25,  William  Bates ;  Bros.  J.  Jones,  J.  Craig,  Thornton  Grimsley,  W.  H.
Pococke,  J.  H.  Penrose,  W.  G.  Pettus,  W.  H.  Hopkins,  and  H.  Hardin.
"  On  motion,  the  proceedings  of  the  Convention  held  at  St.  Louis,  February
twenty-second  last,  and  the  Constitution  adopted  by  them,  were  read.
"Adjourned  until  to-morrow  at  three  o'clock,  p.m.
"Tuesday,  April  24th,  a.l.  5821.
"  Met  pursuant  to  adjournment.
"  Present — W.  Edward  Bates,  M.,  p.  t. ;  James  Kennerly,  S.  W.,  p.  t. ;  William
Bates,  J.  W.,  p.  t. ;  Abra'm  Beck,  Sec,  p.  t. ;  Wm.  G.  Pettus,  Treas.,  p.  t.  ;
John  D.  Daggett,  S.  D.,  p.  t. ;  G.  H.  C.  Melody,  J.  D.,  p.t. ;  John  C.  Potter,
Tyler,  p.  t.
"  Eepresentatives — Missouri  Lodge,  No.  12,  Edward  Bates,  John  D.  Daggett ;
Joachim  Lodge,  No.  25,  William  Bates  ;  St.  Charles  Lodge,  No.  28,  Abram  S.
Platte ;  Bros.  H.  Eankin,  Harvy  Hunt,  T.  Douglass,  and  T.  F.  Eiddick.
"An  election  for  the  officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  for  the  ensuing  year  was
then  held,  and  the  following  Brethren  were  elected,  viz. : —
"Bro.  Thomas  F.  Eiddick,  M.  W.  G.  M. ;  Bro.  James  Kennerly,  S.  G.  W.;
Bro.  William  Bates,  J.  G.  W. ;  Bro.  Achibald  Gamble,  G.  Treas.  ;  Bro.  William
Eenshaw,  G.  Sec
"  The  Grand  Lodge  being  thus  organized,  adjourned  to  Friday,  fourth  of  May
next.

--- Sayfa 256 ---
244  world's  masonic  register.
"  Mat  4th,  a.d.  1821,  a.l.  5821.
"  The  Grand  Lodge  met  in  St.  Louis  pursuant  to  adjournment,  and  being
opened  in  ample  form,  proceeded  in  procession  to  the  Baptist  Church,  where
the  Grand  Officers  were  duly  installed,  and  the  Grand  Lodge  consecrated  by
Bro.  Thompson  Douglass.
"  On  the  5th  of  May,  5821,  the  following  Brethren  were  appointed  a  Com-
mittee to  draft  a  Code  of  By-Laws  for  the  government  of  the  Grand  Lodge :
Bros.  Thompson  Douglass,  W.  G.  Pettus,  and  J.  V.  Gamier.  Which  duty
they  performed,  and  on  the  same  day  the  Code  presented  by  them  was  adopted.
"Population  of  St.  Louis,  4600.
"  On  the  evening  of  October  10th,  1821,  the  Grand  Lodge  being  in  session,  a
Past  Master's  Lodge  was  opened,  and  the  M.  W.  Nathaniel  B.  Tutker  was
duly  installed  G.  M.  of  Masons  of  the  State  of  Missouri.
"1822.  Committee  appointed  by  Missouri  B.  A.  Chapter,  and  Missouri  Lodge,
No.  1,  for  the  purpose  of  procuring,  by  subscription,  funds  to  build  a  Masonic
Hall.
"At  a  special  meeting  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Missouri,  held  in  the  City  of
St.  Louis,  on  Friday  the  29th  day  of  April,  1825,  present  Bt.  W.  G.  H.  C.
Melody,  D.  G.  M.  and  G.  M.  p.  t. ;  Et.  W.  Thornton  Grimsley,  G.  S.  W. ;  Rt.
W.  John  D.  Daggett,  G.  J.  W.  p.  t. ;  A.  Gamble,  G.  Treas. ;  Th.  Douglass,  G.
Secretary,  and  a  large  number  of  visiting  Brethren.
"  Grand  Lodge  opened  in  Third  Degree,  in  solemn  form.
"It  being  stated  by  the  Grand  Master  that  Gen.  La  Payette,  a  Brother
Mason  and  an  officer  of  the  Bevolution,  had  arrived  in  the  city,
"  On  motion  of  Bro.  Gamble,
"  Ordered,  That  a  ballot  be  now  taken  on  the  election  of  Bro.  La  Fayette,  as
an  honorary  member  of  this  Grand  Lodge.
"  When  he  was  duly  elected.
"  On  motion  of  Bro.  Gamble,
"  Ordered,  That  a  committee  be  appointed  to  wait  upon  Bro.  La  Fayette,
inform  him  of  his  election  as  an  honorary  member  of  this  Grand  Lodge,  and
solicit  his  attendance  at  the  present  meeting.
"Bros.  Melody,  Douglass,  and  Atwood  were  appointed  that  committee.
"After  a  short  absence  the  said  committee  returned,  accompanied  by  Bro.  La
Fayette  and  his  son,  Bro.  George  Washington  La  Fayette,  who  were  received
by  the  Lodge  standing,  and  an  address  delivered  by  Bro.  A.  Gamble,  to  which
Bro.  La  Fayette  replied,  and  was  then  conducted  to  a  chair  in  the  east.
"  On  motion  of  Bro.  Gamble,
"  Ordered,  That  the  ballot  be  taken  on  the  election  of  Bro.  Geo.  Washington
La  Fayette,  as  an  honorary  member  of  this  Grand  Lodge,  when  he  was  duly
elected.
"  Bro.  La  Fayette  again  addressed  the  Lodge,  and  with  his  son  withdrew.
"  Grand  Lodge  closed  in  harmony  and  peace.
"  G.  H.  C.  Melody,  D.  6.  M.
"  In  the  year  1831,  a  resolution  was  offered,  but  afterwards  withdrawn,  to
dissolve  the  Grand  and  Subordinate  Lodges  in  the  State.
"The  following  was  unanimously  adopted : —

--- Sayfa 257 ---
Missouri.  245
"Resolved,  That  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  State  of  Missouri  will  zealously
support  the  interest  and  dignity  of  the  Fraternity,  and  will  strictly  require  of
the  subordinate  Lodges  under  this  jurisdiction  a  vigilant  and  faithful  discharge
of  their  duties ;  and  that  it  is  inexpedient  either  to  dissolve  or  suspend  the
Grand  and  Subordinate  Lodges.
"  In  1841  the  Grand  Lodge  adopted,  among  others,  the  following : —
"Resolved,  That  it  is  necessary  and  expedient  and  the  imperative  duty  as  well
as  the  interest  of  the  Grand  Lodge  to  establish  at  some  healthy  and  convenient
point  an  institution  of  learning  for  the  sons  of  indigent  Masons,  and  such  others
as  the  Grand  Lodge  may  from  time  to  time  admit ;  and  also  to  establish  at  such
place  as  the  Grand  Lodge  may  direct,  an  asylum  for  the  maintenance  and
education  of  the  female  orphans  of  worthy  M.  M.  and  others.
"  In  accordance  with  the  foregoing  resolution  the  M.  W.  Priestly  H.  McBird,
G.  M.,  and  others,  did,  on  the  12th  day  of  September,  1842,  purchase  for  the
use  of  the  Grand  Lodge  for  the  institution  of  learning  above  mentioned,  certain
land  and  real  estate  in  the  County  of  Marion,  being  about  1350  acres  of  land,
with  the  buildings  and  improvements  thereon,  including  the  College  buildings  of
the  Upper  Marion  College.
"In  February,  1843,  the  Grand  Lodge  was  chartered  by  the  Legislature  of
the  State.
"June  24th,  1845.  Masonic  College  dedicated  by  the  Grand  Lodge,  M.  W.
J.  W.  S.  Mitchell,  Grand  Master,  presiding.
"June  26th,  1845.  Grand  Lodge  adopted  resolutions  expressive  of  their
sorrow,  on  the  death  of  Bro.  Andrew  Jackson,  Past  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Tennessee,  and  Ex-President  of  the  United  States ;  and  on  June
twenty-eighth,  the  Grand  Lodge  united  with  the  citizens  of  St.  Louis  in  the
public  ceremonies  consequent  on  the  death  of  that  illustrious  Brother.
"March  18th,  1847.  Grand  Lodge  decided  to  locate  the  Masonic  College  at
Lexington,  Lafayette  County,  Mo.,  the  citizens  having  generously  subscribed
the  sum  of  $33,000  for  the  purpose  of  erecting  the  necessary  buildings.
"  On  May  18th.  Grand  Lodge  laid  the  corner-stone  of  the  M  asonic  College
Rt.  W.  G.  H.  C.  Melody,  P.  D.  G.  M.,  presiding.  y
"Owing  to  the  indefatigable  exertions  of  P.  G.  Master  Hon.  B.  W.  Grover,
the  endowment  fund  of  the  College  was  announced  as  $53,000,  being  the  amount
of  scholarships  sold  and  closed  by  the  agents  appointed  for  that  purpose.
"The  Grand  Lodge  has  made  provisions  for  the  boarding,  clothing,  and
educating  of  one  orphan  boy  from  each  Masonic  District  in  the  State,  which,
added  to  the  two  provided  for  by  the  Grand  Chapter,  makes  nineteen  orphan
boys  being  supported  and  educated  by  the  Fraternity  in  this  jurisdiction,  besides
some  thirty  others  who  are  receiving  a  gratuitous  education."
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.
u.
Lodge.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
1 Missouri,
St.  Louis.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
Eobt.  S.  Voorhies,
2 Meridian,
South  St.  Louis.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
B.  Goldsmidt.
3 Beacon,
St.  Louis.
2d  &  4th  Thursdays.
Jos.  W.  Branch.
4 Howard,
New  Franklin.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
A.  H.  Lee.
5 United,
Springfield.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
Marcus  Boyd.
6 Ark,
Newark.
Saturday  after  f.  m.
John  V.  Withers.

--- Sayfa 258 ---
246
world's  masonic  register.
No.
Lodge.
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
Masteb.
7  Grover,
8  Williamsburg,
9  Geo.  Wash'gton,
10  Shawnee,
11  Pauldingville,
12  Tyro,
13  Rising  Sun,
14  Auburn.
15  Central,
16  Memphis,
17  Clarksville,
18  Palmyra,
19  Paris  Union,
20  St.  Louis,
21  New  London,
22  Wellington,
23  Florida,
24  Wyaeonda,
25  Naphthali,
26  Mexico,
27  Temple,
28  St.  John's,
29  Osage,
30  Huntsville,
31  Liberty,
32  Lafayette,
33  Ralls,
34  Troy,
35  Mercer,
36  Cooper,
37  Dawson,
38  Graham,
39  Tully,
40  Mount  Moriah,
41  Bolivar,
42  Middle  Grove,
43  Jefferson,
44  Rochester,
45  Bonhomme,
46  Mart.  Was'gton,
47  Fayette,
48  Fulton,
49  Hayneville,
50  Anderson,
51  Livingston,
52  Wakanda,
63  Weston,
54  Douglass,
55  Arrow  Rock,
Calhoun.
Williamsburg.
St.  Louis.
New  Santa  Fe.
Pauldingville.
Caledonia.
Barry.
Auburn.
Smithville.
Memphis.
Clarksville.
Palmyra.
Paris.
St.  Louis.
New  London.
De  Kalb.
Florida.
Lagrange.
St.  Louis.
Mexico.
Melville.
Hannibal.
Little  Osage.
Huntsville.
Liberty.
Lexington.
Madisonville.
Troy.
Princeton.
Boonville.
Wellington.
Pleasant  Hill.
Tully.
St.  Louis.
Bolivar.
Middle  Grove.
Jefferson  City.
Rochester.
Manchester.
Washington.
Fayette,
Fulton.
Hayneville.
Chapel  Hill.
Glasgow.
Carrollton.
Weston.
Marthasville.
Arrow  Rock.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Friday  before  f.  m.
2d  Saturday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  after  f.  m.
Friday  before  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
3d  Saturday.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Thursdays.
3d  Tuesday.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
2d  Saturday.
3d  Monday.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Mon.  &  3d  Sat.
2d  Monday.
2d  Saturday.
Monday  b.  f.  m.
Tuesday  after  f.  m.
4th  Friday.
4th  Friday.
3d  Friday.
Saturday  after  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
Friday  before  f.  m.
Friday  before  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  after  f.  m.
Monday  bef.  f.  m.
1st  Thursday.
Saturday  after  f.  m.
2d  Saturday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
J.  C.  H.  Broadwater.
J.  W.  Crane.
W.  S.  Gregory.
W.  B.  Oglesby.
Jas.  Vineyard.
Dan.  Carpenter.
Willis  M.  Reynolds.
Eugene  Williams.
J.  W.  Hemphill.
E.  H.  C.  Bailey.
Wm.  N.  Penn.
Adolph  Isaacs.
John  T.  Martin.
John  H.  Talbot.
John  Decker.
S.  M.  Edwards.
Jas.  R.  Long.
Joseph  C.  Bower.
Leonard  Dodge.
John  R.  Hull.
Geo.  W.  Morris.
John  E.  Ryland.
J.  B.  Vardeman.
F.  C.  Cake.
G.  B.  Gillihan.
Andrew  Gibson.
C.  Osborn.
W.  H.  H.  Cundiff.
Wm.  McK.  Brooke.
Wm.  M.  Griggs.
G.  A.  Settle.
Wm.  E.  Dunscombe.
Henry  Blount.
Wm.  S.  Chunn.
G.  W.  Hawkins.
David  L.  Whaley.
J.  R.  King.
J.  A.  Houston.
John  H.  Turner.
Jas.  E.  Drake.
B.  F.  Newhouse.
Joseph  G.  Waller.
Oscar  F.  Potter.

--- Sayfa 259 ---
MISSOURI.
247
Location.
Time  of  Meetins.
Master.
56  Platte,
67  Richmond,
68  Monticello,
59  Lancaster,
60  New  Bloomfield,
61  Osceola,
62  Maysville,
63  St.  Mary's,
64  Landmark,
65  Pattonsburg,
66  Linn,
67  Rocheport,
68  Tebo,
69  Alexandria,
70  Roanoke,
71  Savannah,
72  Danville,
73  Eureka,
74  Warren,
75  Ashley,
76  Independence,
77  Lebanon,
78  St.  Joseph,
79  Polar  Star,
80  Bridgeton,
81  Neosho,
82  Jackson,
83  Laclede,
84  Potter,
85  Johnson,
86  Mitchell,
87  Washington,
88  Bates,
89  Friendship,
90  Prairie,
91  Madison,
92  Perseverance,
93  St.  Mark's,
94  Evening  Star,
95  Acacia,
96  St.  Andrew's,
97  Bethany,
98  Webster,
99  Mount  Vernon,
100  Canton,
101  Easton,
102  Bloomington,
103  Carthage,
104  Heroine,
Platte  City.
Richmond.
Monticello.
Lancaster.
New  Bloomfield.
Osceola.
Maysville.
Perryville.
Warsaw.
Pattonsburg.
Linn.
Rocheport.
Clinton.
Alexandria.
Roanoke.
Savannah.
Danville.
Brunswick.
Keytesville.
Ashley.
Independence,
Steelville.
St.  Joseph.
St.  Louis.
Bridgeton.
Neosho.
Linnaeus.
Lebanon.
Longwood.
Warrensburg.
Columbus.
Greenfield.
Butler.
Chilicothe.
Harrisonvilje.
Madison.
Louisiana.
Cape  Girardeau.
Cuba.
Jackson.
Shelbyville.
Bethany.
Marshfield.
Mount  Vernon.
Canton.
Easton.
Bloomington.
Carthage.
Kansas.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Mon.  &  2d  Sat.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
4th  Friday.
2d  Saturday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
2d  Thursday.
3d  Saturday.
Friday  before  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
2d  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
2d  &  4th  Weds.
Monday  before  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
2d  Monday.
Friday  before  f.  m.
Friday  before  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
2d  Saturday.
Monday  before  f.  m
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Monday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Thursday  af.  f.  m.
2d  Tuesday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
Friday  b.  3d  Sun.
3d  Friday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
H.  Clay  Cockrill.
A.  H.  Conrow.
Hoard  Roberts.
D.  C.  Roberts.
A.  Allen.
John  Whitechurch.
Jas.  R.  Walker.
E.  T.  Majors.
Meredith  Morris.
Geo.  W.  Hopkins.
F.  D.  Evans.
B.  L.  Quarles.
J.  B.  Bradford.
E.  C.  Breck.
Jas.  H.  Robinson.
Louis  S.  Prosser.
Lisbon  Applegate.
H.  W.  Sperry.
R.  M.  Hill.
J.  G.  Anderson.
Paris  S.  Pfouts.
A.  J.  Ham.
R.  T.  Edmonson.
H.  E.  Hurlbut.
Josiah  Ivey.
C.  Q.  Shouse.
Jas.  McCown.
B.  E.  Morrow.
L.  A.  McDowell.
P.  B.  Stratton.
Jas.  McDowell.
S.  G.  Allen.
J.  W.  Dawson.
.  John  W.  Gunn.
W.  B.  Wilson.
,  W.  A.  Spencer.
John  Dickerson.
John  S.  Allen.
David  M.  Jamison.
J.  R.  Cox.
Martin  E.  Green.
A.  Kerns.
Jaa.  Lovern.
Standfield  Ross.
Geo.  W.  Tindall.

--- Sayfa 260 ---
248
world's  masonic  register.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
105  Relief,
106  Laporte,
107  Golden  Square,
108  New  Madrid,
109  Montezuma,
110  Marcus,
111  Trenton,
112  Ezel,
113  Plattsburg,
114  Waverly,
115  Sibley,
116  Daviess,
117  Versailles,
118  Hiram,
119  Foster,
120  Compass,
121  Erwin,
122  Dover,
123  Hermann,
124  Cedar,
125  Gentryville,
126  Seaman,
127  Athens,
128  Kirksville,
129  Constantine,
130  West  Prairie,
121  Potosi,
132  Farmington,
133  StaroftheWest,
134  Pleasant  Mount,
135  Ridgely,
136  Phoenix,
137  Prairieville,
138  Round  Prairie,
139  Oregon,
140  Pappinville,
141  Middlebury,
142  Pleasant  Grove,
143  Flint  Hill,
144  John  Dade,
145  Rising  Star,
146  McGhee,
147  Buffalo,
148  Yanoy,
149  Lexington,
150  Birming,
151  Milton,
152  Linn  Creek,
153  Bloom  field,
Georgetown.
Laporte.
Westport.
New  Madrid.
Santa  Fe,  N.  M.
Frederioktown.
Trenton.
St.  Franoisville.
Plattsburg.
Waverly.
Sibley.
Gallatin.
Versailles.
St.  Charles.
Benton.
Parkville.
St.  Louis.
Dover.
Hermann.
Fremont.
Gentryville.
Milan.
Athens.
Kirksville.
Charleston.
West  Prairie.
Potosi.
Farmington.
Arcadia.
Pleasant  Mount,
Ridgely.
Bowling  Green.
Prairieville.
Newark.
Oregon.
Pappinville.
Middlebury.
Otterville.
Flint  Hill.
Cassville.
Ebenezer.
College  Mound.
Buffalo.
Rutledge.
Lexington.
Birming.
Milton.
Linn  Creek.
Bloomfield.
1st  Monday.
3d  Thursday.
Friday  bef.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
4th  Saturday.
3d  Thursday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Friday  bef.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Monday.
3d  Saturday.
Monday  bef.  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
3d  Monday.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
Friday  bef.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  af.  f.  m.
3d  Wednesday.
3d  Wednesday.
3d  Wednesday.
Monday  af.  f.  m.
Monday  af.  f.  m.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  b.  4th  Sunday.
Saturday  af.  f.  m.    ,
2d  Wednesday.
3d  Monday.
Night  of  or  af.  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Edmund  Ash.
A.  Compton.
Richard  H.  Hatcher.
R.  F.  Green.
Jos.  F.  Wayland.
Geo.  W.  Culver.
Thos.  L.  Johnson.
John  B.  Thruston.
Ch.  W.  Horn.
P.  B.  La  Berten.
Chas.  D.  Eitzen.
M.  C.  White.
Thos.  J.  Patton.
Saml.  Biddison.
R.  R.  Canaday.
B.  G.  Barrow.
C.  C.  Kalfus.
Thos.  P.  Hord.
S.  Browne.
W.  R.  Taylor.
A.  W.  Holloman.
C.  M.  Phelps.
Wm.  Bolton.
R.  T.  Hawkins.
W.  D.  Hatten.
Jas.  Foster.
Z.  Anderson.
Thos.  J.  Starke.
Benj.  E.  Ball.
Wm.  C.  Christian.
John  C.  Cochran.
J.  B.  Mitchell.
John  Steele.
John  Carroll.
Geo.  A.  Kice.
Chas.  L.  Crow.
W.  E.  Briscoe.
.  Green  L.  Poplin.

--- Sayfa 261 ---
MISSOURI.
249
ho.          Lodge.  Location.                          Time  or  Meeting.               Master,
154  Concord,  Concord.    J.  B.  Henderson.
165  Spring  Hill,  Spring  Hill.  1st  Monday.                Wm.  F.  Miller.
156  Ashland,  Ashland.    F.  G.  Sitton.
157  North  Star,  Rockport.  Saturday  b.  f.  m.
158  Comwell,  Eose  Hill.  Friday  bef.  f.  m.        C.  W.  Plowman.
159  Pacific,  Pacific.  Saturday  b.  f.  m.       Frederick  Steines.
160  Edina,  Edina.  Saturday  b.  f.  m.       Wm.  G.  Bryant.
161  Thomasville,  Thomasville.                              t
162  Whitesville,  Whitesville.  2d  Saturday.              W.  E.  Carl.
163  Occidental,  St.  Louis.  2d  &  4th  Mondays.    Wm.  N.  Loker.
164  Joachim,  Hillsboro'.  Saturday  b.  f.  m.       Elias  F.  Honey.
165  Maryville,  Maryville.  1st  Saturday.              M.  F.  Gerard.
166  Mirabile,  Mirabile.  1st  Saturday.
167  El  Dorado,  Luray.  Saturday  af.  f.  m.      W.  A.  Townsend.
168  Fairmount,  Fairmount.  Saturday  af.  f.  m.      C.  H.  Carothers.
169  Tuscumbia,  Tuscumbia.  Saturday  af.  f.  m.      W.  C.  McCubbin.
170  Benevolence,  Utica.  Saturday  af.  f.  m.
171  Hartford,  Hartford.  Friday  bef.  f.  m.         T.  W.  Hand.
172  Wolf  Island,  Wolf  Island.  Monday  b.  f.  m.         H.  L.  Petrie.
173  Union,  Woolford's  Store.       Saturday  af.  f.  m.
174  Sturgeon,  Sturgeon.  1st  Friday.                 W.  G.  Jackson.
175  Newton,  Oliver's  Prairie.  1st  Saturday.              D.  J.  Adams.
176  Pt.  Pleasant,  Pt.  Pleasant.  Friday  bef  f.  m.        John  Woodard.
177  Winchester,  Winchester.  Thursday  b.  f.  m.       Hiram  Beeson.
178  Griswold,  Bear  Creek.    Jas.  McLure.
179  Pride  of  theWest,St.  Louis.  1st  &  3d  Weds.  Wm.  Burden.
180  Kenner,  Athens.  Saturday  b.  f.  m.       F.  R.  Kenner.
181  Novelty,  Novelty.    S.  D.  Hunter.
182  Stewartsville,  Stewartsville.                D.  M.  McDonald.
183  California,  California.
 A.V.Thorpe.
184  Modern,  Humansville.                L.Smith.
185  Chamois,  Chamois.
 A.  L.  McGregor.
186  Dayton,  Dayton.
 Philip  Fulkerson.
187  Henry  Clay,  Millersburg.
 N.L.Norton.
188  Hannibal,  Hannibal.
 B.  N.  Crump.
189  Zeredatha,  St.  Joseph.
 Chas.  F.  Knight.
190  Putnam,  Newton.
 Alex.  Wires.
191  Zerubbabel,    John  S.  Brasfield.
192  Frankford,  Frankford.
 Wm.  Penix.
193  Anjerona,  Missouri  City.
194  Wellsville,  Wellsville.
195  Wet  au  Glaize,    Wet  au  Glaize.
196  Quitman,  Quitman.
197  Camden,  Camden.
198  Allensville,  Allensville.
199  New  Hope,  New  Hope.
200  Washburn,  Washburn  Prairie.
201  Jamesport,  Jamesport.

--- Sayfa 262 ---
250
No.  Lodge.
world's  masonic  register.
Location.  Time  op  Meeting.
Master.
202  Westville,
203  Pleasant  Ridge,
204  Bent,
205  Rocky  Mountain,
Westville.
Pleasant  Ridge.
Fernando  De  Taos,  New  Mexico.
Camp  Floyd,  Utah  Territory.
GRAND  CHAPTER.
The  Grand  Chapter  of  Missouri  was  organized  May  18th,  5846,  and  is
subordinate  to  the  General  Grand  Chapter.  At  its  Annual  Convocation,  in
May,  5860,  there  were  26  subordinate  Chapters  under  its  jurisdiction.  The  re-
turns compiled  May  23d,  5860,  show  the  following :  Exalted,  138 ;  Admitted,
29 ;  Dimitted,  39 ;  Died,  9 ;  Suspended,  34 ;  Expelled,  2.  Total  number  of
members,  882.    The  receipts  of  the  Grand  Chapter  were  $1222.
SUBORDINATE  CHAPTERS.
No.     Name.
1  Missouri,
2  Palmyra,
3  Liberty,
4  Weston,
5  Boonville,
7  Hannibal,
8  St.  Louis,
10  Lexington,
13  Hunts ville,
14  St.  Joseph,
15  Springfield,
16  Monroe,
17  Columbia,
19  Davenport,
20  Monticello,
21  Melody,
22  Bloomington,
23  Bond,
24  George  Washington,
25  Bellefontaine,
26  De  Molay,
27  Mexico,
28  Kansas  City,
29  Eastern  Star,
30  Lone  Star,
31  Greenfield,
Location.
St.  Louis.
Palmyra.
Liberty.
Weston.
Boonville.
Hannibal.
St.  Louis.
Lexington.
Huntsville.
St.  Joseph.
Springfield.
Paris.
Rocheport.
Westport.
Monticello.
Platte  City.
Bloomington.
Louisiana.
Carrollton.
St.  Louis.
Warrensburg.
Mexico.
Kansas  City.
Memphis.
Chilicothe.
Greenfield.
Time  op  Meeting.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
1st  Friday.
1st  Saturday.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
1st  Monday.
Wednesday  before  full  moon.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
2d  Monday.
2d  Monday.
1st  Friday.
1st  Monday  bef.  full  moon.
4  th  Monday.
Saturday  after  full  moon.
Wednesday  bef.  2d  Sunday.
1st  Monday  after  full  moon.
Saturday  before  full  moon.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
Thursday  of  or  bef.  full  m.
2d  Friday.
2d  &  4th  Wednesdays.
1st  Monday.
Thursday  b.  Sat.  b.  full  m.
Friday  after  full  moon.
COUNCILS.
There  were  4  Councils  in  Missouri,  3  of  which,  under  the  Grand  Council  of
Kentucky,  are  dormant.  The  other,  St.  Louis,  No.  7,  located  at  St.  Louis,  is
under  the  Grand  Council  of  Illinois,  and  is  the  only  active  working  Council  in
the  State.

--- Sayfa 263 ---
MISSOURI.  251
GRAND  COMMANDERY.
The  Grand  Commandery  of  Missouri  was  organized  on  the  22d  of  May,  1860.
It  has  4  subordinates  under  its  jurisdiction.  Its  first  Annual  Conclave  was
held  in  the  City  of  St.  Louis,  on  the  23d  of  May.  Its  second  Annual  Conclave
is  to  be  held  in  the  City  of  Weston,  on  the  Wednesday  before  the  first  Monday
in  May,  1861.  The  total  number  of  Sir  Knights,  as  per  last  published  report,
201.
SUBORDINATE   COMMANDERIES.
Time  op  Meeting.  Organized.
   184!).
4th  Wednesday.  Sept.  19,  1853.
   Sept.  19,  1856.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.  May  23,  1860.
This  last  Commandery  received  a  dispensation  from  the  M.  B.  Grand  Master,
B.  B.  French,  November  9th,  1859,  which  was  prior  to  the  formation  of  the
Grand  Commandery.
No.       Name.
Location.
1  St.  Louis,
St.  Louis.
2  Weston,
Weston.
3  Lexington,
Lexington.
4  St.  Joseph,
St.  Joseph.
SUBSCRIBERS'  NAMES.
LAGBANGE,  Lewis  County.
Davis,  Basil  E.,  House  Carpenter  and  Joiner.    P.  M.,  Wyaconda,  24.
Shepherd,  Thomas  E.,  Architect  and  Builder.  P.  M.,  Wyaconda,  24 ;  P.  II.  P.,
Monticello  chap.,  20.
Talbot,  John  H.,  Wholesale  and  Betail  Dealer  in  Foreign  and  Domestic  Dry
Goods,  Hardware,  and  Cutlery.    W.  M.,  Wyaconda,  24 ;  Monticello  chap.,  20.
NEW  LONDON.
Ralls,  John,  Lawyer,  New  London.     P.  G.  M.,  Grand  Lodge  ;  Balls,  33  ;
Hannibal  chap.,  7.
Vardeman,  Jeremiah  B.,  Farmer,  New  London.  W.  M.,  Ralls,  33  ;  Hanniba
chap.,  7.
PACIFIC,  Franklin  County.
Eoff,  J.  R.,  Merchant.    Pacific,  159.
Fausel,  William,  Franklin  House.     Pacific,  159.
Glenn,  Wm.  Ellis,  (M.D.,)  Physician.     Sec,  Pacific,  159.
Jeffries,  W.  D.,  Fanner.    Pacific,  159.
ST.  JOSEPH,  Buchanan  County.
Brown,  G.  W.,  Tin  and  Stove  Dealer.     St.  Joseph,  78  ;  St.  Joseph  chap.,  14.
Buel,  Norman,  Woolen  Manufacturer  and  Merchant  Miller.     St.  Joseph,  78.
Hammond,  H.  R.,  Forwarding  and  Commission  Merchant,  and  Steamboat
Agent.    St.  Joseph,  78  ;  St.  Joseph  chap.,  14.
17

--- Sayfa 264 ---
252  world's  masonic  register.
Peltz,  Samuel,  Clerk.     St.  Joseph,  78 ;  Iowa  chap.,  1,  Burlington,  Iowa.
Ross,  J.  T.,  Foreman  in  St.  Joseph  Sash  and  Door  Factory.     St.  Joseph,  7P.
Rowley,  W.  D.,  Machinist  H.  and  St.  Joseph  R.  R.    Bloomington,  43,  Illinois.
Thompson,  George,  Master  Mechanic  on  H.  and  St.  Joseph  R.  E.    St.
Joseph,  78.
ST.  LOUIS.
Armisted,  R.  W.,  Ornamental  Painter,  50  Pine  Street.     St.  Louis,  20.
Ballinan,  Adam  H.,  Lumber  Merchant,  Southwest  corner  Seventh  St.  and
Cass  Av.     Beacon,  3.
Barrell,  Luther  L.,  Merchant,  15  Orange  St.  Pride  of  the  West,  179  ;  Mis-
souri chap.,  1.
Bronson,  Jas.  H.,  Telegraph  Operator,  Court  House.     Missouri,  1.
Burden,  William,  Real  Estate  Agent,  N.  E.  corner  Tenth  and  Benton  Streets.
W.  M.,  Pride  of  the  West,  179  ;  High  Priest,  Missouri  chap.,  1.
Campbell,  S.  D.,  Engineer  P.  Railroad.     Jefferson  City,  43.
Ooff,  James,  Constable,  St.  L.  Tp.     Pride  of  the  West,  179.
Cohn,  M.  L.,  Wholesale  Clothing  and  Dry  Goods,  78  Morgan  St.  Pride  of
the  West,  179.
Cook,  Edward  James,  Mailing  Clerk,  Post  Office.  Pride  of  the  West,  179;
Missouri  chap.,  1.
Dattelzweig,  F.,  Clothing  and  Gentlemen's  Furnishing  Goods,  184  Broadway;
residence  184  Seventh  Street.     Pride  of  the  West,  179.
Dobbins,  James  A.,  Practical  Engineer,  30  Plumb  St.  Pride  of  the  West,
179.
Grether,  Jr.,  Jno.,  Justice  of  Peace  and  Notary  Public,  43  Cherry  St.  Pride
of  the  West,  179. .
Gumpertson,  L.  M.,  Clothier  and  Gents.  Furnishing  Goods,  9  North  Fourth
St.     St.  Louis,  20.
Haight,  Wm.,  Wood  and  Coal  Dealer,  86  South  Fourth  St.
Henley,  Thomas  J.,  Commission  and  Forwarding  Merchant,  No.  7  City
Buildings,  South  Commercial  Street ;  residence  225  Pine  Street.     Polar  Star,  79.
Hess,  Henry  C.  E.,  Liquor  and  Wine  Merchant,  74  Commercial  St.  Pride  of
the  West,  179.
Hudson,  Henry,  Wig  Maker  and  Perfumer,  96  Market  St.    Missouri,  1.
Hume,  John  T.,  Attorney,  46  Chestnut  St.     Occidental,  163.
Huston,  Samuel,  Ship-carpenter,  Mound  St.     Pride  of  the  West,  179.
Isaacs,  Adolph,  Wholesale  Clothing  Dealer,  56  North  Maine  St.  W.  M.,  St.
Louis,  20.
Ivester,  Enoch  T.,  Steamboat  Engineer  on  Mississippi;  residence  Seventh
Street  between  O'Fallen  and  Cass  Avenue.     Occidental,  163.
Johnson,  James,  Coal  Miner,  St.  L.  Tp.,  St.  L.  Co.     Missouri,  1.
Kearney,  John,  Engineer,  29  Franklin  Avenue.     St.  Louis,  20.
Keiler,  Wm.,  Wholesale  Clothing  Dealer,  56  North  Main  St.    St.  Louis,  20.
Kirgan,  Thos.,  Machinist  in  Rope  Factory,  corner  Barry  and  Ninth  Streets.
Missouri,  1.
Kornick,  A.  L.,  Wholesale  and  Retail  Clothier,  197  Broadway.  Pride  of  the
West,  179.
Maas,  Zech.,  Clothier,  193  Broadway.     Pride  of  the  West,  179.

--- Sayfa 265 ---
Missouri.  253
Mayberry,  Jonas,  Wholesale  Dealer  in  Hats  and  Caps,  1  North  Main  St.
Pride  of  the  West,  179.
Miller,  Ohas.  C,  Architect  and  Superintendent.    Mount  Vernon,  64,  Ohio.
Morgan,  Isaac  H.,  North  Miss.  Railroad.  Hornellsville,  331,  N.  Y. ;  Steu-
ben chap.,  101,  N.  Y. ;  Edwards  com.,  22,  N.  Y.
Nieman,  Frederick  Arnold,  Dry  Goods  Merchant,  64  Franklin  Avenue.  St.
Louis,  20.
Outley,  Jno.  J.,  Daguerrean  Artist,  corner  Third  and  Washington  Avenue.
Missouri,  1 ;  St.  Louis  chap.,  8.
Porter,  S.  D.,  Eeal  Estate  Agent,  65  Washington  Avenue.    Occidental,  163.
Eees,  David,  Miner.    Missouri,  1.
Sensenderfer,  John,  Importer  and  Wholesale  Dealer  in  Tobacco  and  Cigars,
S.  E.  corner  of  Second  and  Pine  Sts.     G.  Washington,  9.
Stremmel,  Philip,  Justice  of  Peace  and  Notary  Public,  Tenth,  between  North
Market  and  Munroe  Sts.    Treas.,  Beacon,  3 ;  Bellefontaine  chap.,  25.
Thornton,  John  F.,  Livery  Stable  Keeper,  N.  S.  Gratiot,  between  Eighth  and
Ninth  Sts.    Naphtali,  25 ;  St.  Louis  chap.,  8.
Torline,  J.  D.,  Wholesale  and  Retail  Dealer  in  Boots  and  Shoes,  246  Broad-
way.   J.  W.,  St.  Louis,  20.
Turk,  Barnett,  Merchant,  44  Front  St.,  Levee.    Pride  of  the  West,  179.
Turnbull,  Frank  B.,  Lottery  Ticket  Vender,  29  Market  St.     Missouri,  1.
Tuttle,  Chas.  W.,  Detective  Police.     Zion,  1,  Detroit,  Mich.
Weigle,  Abraham,  Dry  Goods  Merchant,  Spring  St.,  between  Ninth  and
Tenth  Sts.    Beacon,  3 ;  Scribe  of  Bellefontaine  chap.,  25.
Weil,  David,  Merchant,  91  Franklin  Avenue.  Pride  of  the  West,  179  ;  Mis-
souri chap.,  1.
Wentz,  E.  L.,  Civil  Engineer ;  residence  Binghamton,  N.  Y.  P.  M.,  Bing-
hamton,  177 ;  Binghamton  chap.,  139 ;  Malta  com.,  21.
Alexander,  Joseph  H.,  Attorney  at  Law,  St.  Charles  C.  H.   P.  M.,  Hiram,  118.
Broadwater,  J.  C.  H.,  Miller,  Williamsburg,  Callaway  co.  P.  M.,  Williams-
burg, 8.
Cox,  M.  T.,  Merchant  Miller,  Rochester  Mills,  Buchanan  co.    St.  Joseph,  78.
Farnhatn,  A.  C,  Principal  of  High  School,  Arcadia,  Iron  co.  P.  M.,  Star
of  the  West,  133.
Foreman,  F.  E.,  Machinist,  St.  Charles,  St.  Charles  co.    Hiram,  118.
McCubbin,  W.  C,  Farmer,  Tuscumbia,  Miller  co.    W.  M.,  Tuscumbia,  169.
Reynerson,  John  D.,  Merchant,  Birmingham.  Golden  Square,  107  ;  Independ-
ence chap.,  12 ;  Weston  encpt.,  2.
Tindall,  G.  W.,  Dentist,  Kansas  City,  Jackson  co.  Heroine,  104 ;  Kansas
City  chap.,  28.
January  25th,  1820,  the  Masonic  fraternity  of  Scotland  laid  the  foundation
stone  of  a  monument  to  the  memory  of  Burns,  the  Ayrshire  Poet,  at  Allaway
Kirk,  in  Ayrshire.  Twenty-five  Lodges  participated  in  the  ceremonies.  The
fraternity  of  the  United  States  contributed  liberally  for  the  purpose.

--- Sayfa 266 ---
NEBRASKA.
GRAND  LODGE.
Organized  September  23d,  5857.
The  Annual  Communications  of  the  Grand  Lodge  are  held  on  the  first
Tuesday  in  June.  It  has  no  permanent  location.  The  Annual  Communication
in  June,  5861,  will  be  held  in  Plattsmouth.
The  revenue  of  the  Grand  Lodge  is  derived  from  the  following  sources  : —
For  Charters  for  new  Lodges
$50
For  every  Initiation
3
The  Grand  Lodge  has  6  subordinate  Lodges  in  its  jurisdiction.    The  returns
at  the  Annual  Communication  in  June,  5860,  show  the  following :  Number  of
Master  Masons,  176 ;  Fellow  Crafts,  3 ;  Entered  Apprentices,  8 ;  Withdrawn,
14;  Suspended,  9.    Amount  of  dues,  $236.
The  officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  elected  June  5th,  5860,  are  as  follows : —
George  Armstrong,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
L.  B.  Kinney,  R.  W.  Deputy  Grand  Master.
S.  Redfield,  R.  W.  Senior  Grand  Warden.
D.  H.  Wheeler,  R.  W.  Junior  Grand  Warden.
J.  H.  Maxon,  R.  W.  Grand  Treasurer.
R.  W.  Furnas,  R.  W.  Grand  Secretary.
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.
No.       Name.
1  Nebraska,
2  Western  Star,
3  Capitol,
4  Nemaha,
5  Omadi,
6  Plattsmouth,
Location.
Bellevue.
Nebraska  City.
Omaha.
Brownville.
Omadi.
Plattsmouth.
Time  op  Meeting.
Tuesday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tuesday  bef.  f.  m.
Monday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
Sat.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
1st  Monday.
Master.
L.  B.  Kinney.
Wyllys  C.  Ranson.
George  Armstrong.
B.  W.  Furnas.
Geo.  W.  Wilkinson.
Daniel  H.  Wheeler.
CONDITION  OF  MASONRY  IN  NEBRASKA.
The  M.  W.  Grand  Master,  Robert  C.  Jordan,  in  his  address  read  before  the
Grand  Lodge,  June  5th,  5860,  submits  the  following  views  in  relation  to  the
condition  of  Masonry  in  Nebraska  : —
"  Since  the  organization  of  our  Grand  Lodge,  we  have,  as  Grand  and  subor-
dinate Lodges,  been  peculiarly  situated,  with  much  to  encounter  for  success,  and
but  little  to  encourage  us  on  our  way.  The  six  Lodges  that  now  compose  our
(254)

--- Sayfa 267 ---
NEBRASKA.  255
Grand  Lodge  were  organized  and  set  to  work  when  times  were  prosperous  and
good.  Soon  after  their  organization  a  change  took  place  that  will  long  be
remembered  by  the  residents  of  this  Territory,  from  which  we  are  now  just
recovering,  and  that  very  slowly.
"In  addition  to  financial  troubles,  during  the  period  mentioned,  the  great
gold  discovery  was  made  west  of  us,  and  a  large  number  of  our  members  having
suffered  severely  from  the  effects  of  the  crisis,  and  being  possessed  with  a  spirit
of  adventure,  concluded  to  seek  fortune's  favors  and  smiles  in  the  newly  dis-
covered gold  mines.  All  of  the  six  Lodges  have  suffered  greatly  from  this
cause,  in  some  instances  leaving  barely  enough  to  perform  the  duties  of  the
Lodge."
Brother  C.  D.  Keller,  in  a  report  on  the  introduction  of  Freemasonry  in
Nebraska,  remarks  as  follows : —
"  The  first  regular  Communication  held  under  the  Dispensation  was  on  the
evening  of  April  3d,  1855,  in  the  second  story  of  the  old  Trading  Post,  then
owned  by  Brother  Peter  A.  Sarpy.  In  the  adjoining  room  resided  a  family  of
the  natives  of  the  soil— the  Omahas — who,  in  connection  with  many  others  of
that  tribe,  exhibited  quite  a  curiosity  to  know  what  their  pale-faced  brothers
were  doing ;  hence,  in  order  to  elude  observation,  and  preserve  the  secrets  of
our  order,  large  MachaDaw  blankets  were  hung  around  the  room,  until  the
desired  end  was  accomplished."
The  following  sketch  of  the  introduction  of  Freemasonry  in  Nebraska  is  by
A.  R.  Gilmore  : —
"  The  first  organized  effort  to1  a  formal  introduction  of  Masonry  into  this
Territory  transpired  in  November,  1854.  In  that  month  and  year  a  preliminary
meeting  of  Craftsmen  was  held  for  the  purpose  of  taking  initiatory  steps  to  the
procurement  of  a  Dispensation,  and  other  authority  requisite  to  the  establish-
ment of  a  Lodge  of  F.  and  A.  Masons,  at  Bellevue,  then  in  Douglas,  but  now
i  in  Sarpy  County.  The  meeting  assembled  in  Green,  Kinney  &  Co.'s  log  store,
in  St.  Mary's,  Mills  County,  Iowa,  directly  opposite  Bellevue.  It  was  attended
by  Brothers  L.  B.  Kinney,  our  present  worthy  and  efficient  Deputy  Grand
Master,  now  a  resident  of  Bellevue ;  Ex-Governor  Ansel  Briggs,  now  a  resident
of  Florence,  Douglas  County;  P.  J.  McMahan,  then  and  now  a  resident  of
Council  Bluff,  Iowa ;  A.  W.  Lockwood,  then  and  now  a  resident  of  Traders'
Point,  Iowa ;  James  M.  Gatewood,  then  retiring  from  the  United  States  Indian
Agency  of  the  Omaha,  Pawnee,  and  Otoe  tribes  of  Indians,  now  a  resident  of
Missouri;  George  Hepner,  then  United  States  Agent  for  aforesaid  tribes,  since
deceased ;  A.  W.  Hollister,  then  of  Bellevue,  present  residence  unknown  to  me  ;
and  your  '  bumble  servant,'  constituted  the  whole  number  present.  After  '  due
deliberation,'  a  petition  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Illinois  was  drawn  up  in  due
form,  praying  them  to  grant  their  petitioners  a  Dispensation,  and  was  signed  by
all  those  named  as  being  present,  and  directed  to  the  address  of  the  Grand
Master  of  Illinois,  and  at  once  transmitted  by  mail.  I  visited  Chicago  in  De-
cember of  that  year,  and  found  that  our  petition  had  been  received,  and  was
then  in  the  hands  of  the  Deputy  Grand  Master,  with  whom  I  arranged  the  pay-
ment of  their  usual  fees,  and,  after  some  little  delay,  the  Dispensation  was  issued
and  the  name  of  L.  B.  Kinney  inserted  as  our  first  Master,  and  then  transmitted
to  him  by  mail.   I  might  as  well  add  here,  that  W.  M.  Kinney  represented  Belle-

--- Sayfa 268 ---
256  world's  masonic  register.
vue  Lodge,  at  the  Annual  Session  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  in  Springfield,  Illinois,
in  1855,  and  surrendered  our  Dispensation,  and  received  in  its  place  a  Charter,
under  which  authority  that  Lodge  worked,  until  the  formation  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  this  Territory,  in  1857.
"  On  my  return  to  Bellevue,  in  April,  1855, 1  found  the  Lodge  duly  organized,
and  holding  their  regular  meetings  in  the  second  story  of  the  Trading  Post  of
General  Sarpy,  near  the  steamboat  landing  for  that  town.
"This  venerable  specimen  of  primitive  architecture  still  graces  the  spot
where  it  then  stood,  and  around  and  within  its  rude  walls  are  clustered  many
highly  valued  associations.  Its  well-worn  threshold  was  the  first  one  over
which  my  feet  passed  after  my  advent  to  this  Territory,  an  event  which  I  then
recorded,  in  pencil,  on  the  cornice  beneath  the  dripping  eaves,  the  trace  of
which  time  has  not  yet  obliterated.  Beneath  its  hospitable  roof  my  first  repast
was  partaken,  at  the  instance  of  its  hardy  but  generous  proprietor,  the  pioneer
of  Nebraska,  General  Peter  A.  Sarpy.  Within  its  rude  and  rough  walls  the
'sound  of  the  gavel'  first  hailed  the  craft,  and  called  them  to  their  first  'labor.'
In  this  humble  room  the  pioneer  band  of '  the  brotherhood'  first  assembled  around
their  sacred  but  rude  altar,  (a  bale  of  Indian  blankets,)  and  received  their  first
charge  from  the  lips  of  their  first  Master,  (L.  B.  Kinney,)  who  ever  'set  the
craft  to  work'  under  '  due  instructions,'  in  this  then  extreme  limit  of  civilization.
The  official  regalia,  or  rather  the  jewels  of  the  Lodge,  were  skillfully  made  of  tin,
by  a  craftsman,  who  afterward  established  the  manufacture  of  tinware  in  this
city,  and  represented  its  population  in  our  Territorial  Legislature  in  1857-8.
There  are  many  interesting  events  connected  with  this  building,  and  the  pro-
ceedings of  the  first  meetings,  of  our  infant  Lodge  therein,  that  would  furnish
material  for  an  interesting  publication,  but  my  time  and  meagre  ability  form  an
insuperable  barrier  to  my  success  in  such  undertaking.
"  During  the  spring  of  1855,  petitions  for  initiation  were  received  from  Stephen
Decatur  and  Isaiah  Bennett,  and  favorably  determined,  but  there  being  no  suita-
ble room  for  work  in  that  place,  no  initiation  took  place  during  that  year.
"We  continued  to  meet  regularly  through  the  season,  sometimes  in  Brother
Kinney's  store,  and  sometimes  in  a  room  which  I  occupied  in  the  second  story
of  a  large  unfinished  building,  afterward  known  as  the  Benton  House,  which
was  destroyed  by  fire  in  the  fall  of  1857.
"During  the  fall  of  1855,  General  Peter  A.  Sarpy  handed  in  his  petition  for
initiation.  During  its  consideration  and  determination,  a  circumstance  trans-
pired of  rather  a  ludicrous  character,  caused  by  an  almost  total  destitution  of
furniture,  clothing  and  working  tools.  In  order  to  exhibit  this  feature,  and  give
our  present  well-provided  brethren  a  knowledge  of  the  expedients  we  were  obliged
to  resort  to,  I  will  give  the  history  of  the  manner  in  which  this  application  was
disposed  of.  The  meeting  alluded  to  was  held  in  my  room  before  described.
The  report  of  the  committee,  to  whom  was  referred  the  petition  of  General
Sarpy,  had  been  received,  and  was  favorable  to  his  admission.  A  ballot  was
proposed,  seconded  and  carried.  The  preparation  for  this  duty  developed  the
fact  that  we  were  destitute  of  both  box  and  ballots,  and  to  relieve  ourselves  from
this  awkward  dilemma  we  were  forced  to  substitute  an  empty  gallon  pickle  jar
for  a  ballot  box,  and  a  box  of  small  gravel-stones,  which  I  gathered  as  speci-
mens, and  which  I  still  had  in  my  possession,  were  selected  to  serve  the  friendly
office,  while  a  cup  of  '  leaden  bullets'  were  to  perform  the  '  darker  colored'  ser-

--- Sayfa 269 ---
NEBRASKA.  257
yice.  The  jar,  the  stones,  and  bullets  were  then  placed  upon  our  '  primitive'
altar,  (two  trunks  covered  with  a  blue  blanket,)  when  we  gravely  proceeded  with
our  ballot.  This  done,  our  W.  M.  ordered  the  '  contents  of  the  bottle'  analyzed,
and  the  result  proclaimed ;  a  task  that  was  speedily  and  scientifically  performed
by  the  J.  and  S.  W.,  who  gave  their  unanimous  opinion  that  the  presence  of
'  lead'  was  not  discovered  or  detected,  and  that  the  ballot  was  clear  in  favor  of
the  candidate.  A  few  evenings  thereafter,  as  many  of  our  members  as  could
leave,  accompanied  the  'candidate'  to  Council  Blufl's,  it  being  the  evening  of  the
regular  meeting  of  the  Council  Bluff  Lodge.  They  closed  their  Lodge  in  the
early  part  of  the  evening,  and  kindly  tendered  Bellevue  Lodge  the  use  of  their
room,  furniture,  tools  and  aid.  Whereupon  our  Lodge  was  opened  in  due  form,
General  L.  L.  Bowen  presiding,  and  the  Entered  Apprentice  Degree  duly  con-
ferred upon  General  Peter  A.  Sarpy,  the  hardy  pioneer  and  Indian  trader  of
thirty-six  years  standing.
"  This  was  the  first  degree  conferred  by  Bellevue  Lodge.  I  should  have  men-
tioned before  this,  that  the  two  first-named  candidates  were  never  initiated,
Stephen  Decatur  having  removed  to  Decatur  City,  in  this  Territory,  where  he
now  resides ;  and  Isaiah  Bennett,  brother  of  our  worthy  townsman  and  brother,
John  B.  Bennett,  died  in  Glenwood,  Mills  County,  Iowa,  in  the  summer  of  1855.
His  funeral  was  attended  by  a  large  concourse  of  personal  friends,  and  among
them  most  of  the  members  of  Bellevue  Lodge,  your  humble  servant  being  one
of  the  number.
"In  January,  1856, 1  closed  my  membership  in  Bellevue  Lodge,  and  removed
to  Omaha,  where  I  united  with  and  participated  in  the  establishment  of  Capitol
Lodge,  as  shown  in  the  transcript  of  their  record."
A  LAUGHABLE  INCIDENT.
The  good  old  Tyler,  the  father  of  the  present  gentlemanly  brother  who  tyles
the  Lodges  in  the  new  Masonic  Temple  in  Philadelphia,  was  something  of  a  wag
in  his  day,  and  would  have  his  joke.  One  evening,  as  he  was  preparing  the
regalia,  etc.,  for  the  Lodge  which  was  to  meet  on  that  night,  a  man  walked  into
the  Lodge  room,  and,  as  the  gas  was  not  lighted,  he  could  not  see  who  it  was
that  was  intruding.  The  Tyler,  in  a  gruff,  loud  voice,  inquired,  "Who  is  there?"
The  person  answered,  "A  friend."  The  Tyler  knew  his  voice,  and,  anticipating
some  fun,  cried  out,  "  What  do  you  want  here  ?"  at  the  same  time  unsheathing
a  sword.  The  intruder,  seeing  the  glittering  steel,  and  not  knowing  who  it  was
that  was  speaking  to  him,  was  frightened,  and  scampered  out  of  the  room  and
bounded  down  the  stairs  as  if  "  Old  Nick"  was  at  his  heels.  The  old  Tyler
enjoyed  a  surfeit  of  laughter  at  the  rapid  decampment  of  his  acquaintance.
The  next  day  he  met  his  acquaintance,  who  related  to  him  that,  as  he  was
passing  the  hall  the  evening  before,  he  thought  he  would  go  in  and  see  the
Masonic  Lodge  room,  and  that  some  person  there  drew  a  sword  and  intended  to
kill  him.  The  Tyler  laughed  heartily,  and  told  him  that  he  was  the  person  who
was  in  the  room.  The  gentleman  would  scarcely  credit  it,  as  he  did  not  recog-
nize the  voice.  Many  a  hearty  laugh  did  the  good  old  Tyler  enjoy  whenever  he
thought  of  the  mistake  his  acquaintance  made,  and  how  rapidly  he  made  his  exit
on  seeing  the  sword.

--- Sayfa 270 ---
NEW  HAMPSHIRE.
GRAND  LODGE.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  New  Hampshire  was  organized  July  8th,  5789.  Its
Annual  Communications  are  held  in  the  City  of  Concord,  commencing  on  the
Tuesday  next  following  the  first  Wednesday  in  June.  The  Grand  Lodge  con-
sists of  the  Grand  Officers,  District  Deputy  Grand  Masters,  Past  Grand  and
Deputy  Grand  and  District  Deputy  Grand  Masters,  and  Past  Grand  Wardens,
and  the  Masters  and  Wardens  of  its  subordinate  Lodges.
The  revenue  of  the  Grand  Lodge  is  derived  from  the  following  sources: —
For  Dispensations  for  new  Lodges
$10  00
For  Charters
30  00
For  every  Initiation
1  50
For  Diplomas    50
This  Grand  Lodge  has  45  subordinate  Lodges  under  its  jurisdiction.  The  re-
turns of  44  Lodges,  made  in  June,  5860,  show  a  total  membership  of  2377,  and
347  Initiations  during  the  year.
The  officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  for  the  present  Masonic  year  are  as  fol-
lows : —
Aaron  P.  Hughes,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
Jacob  C.  Hanson,  E.  W.  Deputy  Grand  Master.
Christopher  Whitney,  E.  W.  Senior  Grand  Warden.
Bichard  N.  Eoss,  R.  W.  Junior  Grand  Warden.
John  Knowlton,  R.  W.  Grand  Treasurer.
Horace  Chase,  E.  W.  Grand  Secretary.
Isaac  H.  Marshall,  Senior  Grand  Deacon.
Jared  I.  Williams,  Junior  Grand  Deacon.
George  C.  Williams,  Grand  Marshal.
J.  Warren  Towle,  Grand  Sword  Bearer.
James  H.  Perry,  Grand  Pursuivant.
Isaac  Eastman,  Grand  Tyler.
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.
No.       Lodge.
1  St.  John's,
6  Franklin,
7  Benevolent,
8  North  Star,
9  Hiram,
11  Blazing  Star,
(258)
Location.
Portsmouth.
Lebanon.
Milford.
Lancaster.
Claremont.
Concord.
Time  of  Meeting.
1st  Wed.  of  each  mo.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tiies.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tues.of  week  of  f.  m.
1st  Wed.  of  each  mo.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Master.
Oliver  G.  FernalJ.
J.  B.  Perry.
Norman  Burdick.
William  Burns.
James  Goodwin.
Lyman  A.  Walker.

--- Sayfa 271 ---
NEW  HAMPSHIRE.
259
No.       Lodge.
Time  ov  Meeting.
Master.
14  King  Solomon's,
15  Mount  Vernon,
16  Olive  Branch,
17  Morning  Star,
18  Charity,
19  Sullivan,
21  Humane,
24  Bethel,
26  Altemont,
29  Strafford,    ,
30  St.  Paul's,
31  St.  Peter's,
32  Mount  Lebanon,
37  Evening  Star,
38  Harmony,
39  Rising  Sun,
40  Philesian,
41  La  Fayette,
42  Social  Friends,
43  Aurora,
46  Grafton,
47  Rising  Star,
49  Libanus,
50  Social,
52  Clinton,
56  St.  Andrew's,
57  Carroll,
58  Charter  Oak,
59  Star  in  the  East,
60  Meridian,
61  Washington,
62  Unity,
63  Moosehillock,
64  Eane,
65  Granite,
66  Burns,
67  Souhegan,
68  Red  Mountain,
69  Mt.  Prospect,
Wilmot.
Newport.
Plymouth.
Wolfborough.
Jaffrey.
Lee.
Rochester.
New  Ipswich.
Peterborough.
Dover.
Alstead.
Bradford.
Gilford.
Colebrook.
Hillsborough.
Nashua.
Winchester.
Manchester.
Eeene.
Henniker.
Haverhill.
Newmarket.
Somersworth.
Enfield.
Wilton.
Portsmouth.
Freedom.
Effingham.
Exeter.
Franklin.
Manchester.
Wakefield.
Wentworth.
Lisbon.
Bollinsford.
Littleton.
Mason.
Sandwich.
Holderness.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thurs.  on  orb.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Wednesday.
Thurs.  of  w.  of  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Monday  b.  f.  m.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thurs.  of  w.  of  f.  m.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  af.  f.  m.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  Monday.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
Fri.  of  week  of  f.  m.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  Wed.  after  f.  m.
Thurs.  on  or  a.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  of  w.  of  f.  m.
Tuesday  after  f.  m.
Thurs.  of  w.  off.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
John  M.  Hayes.
Thomas  Sanborn.
James  B.  Moody.
Abel  Haley.
Silas  Cummings.
Gorham  W.  Hoitt.
Geo.  Corson.
Warren  Pratt.
Mortier  L.  Morrison.
John  Twombly.
Ira  Rust.
John  K.  Richardson.
E.  E.  Webster.
Albe  Holmes.
Madison  Templeton.
Thomas  Pearsons.
John  Cook,  Jr.
Ezra  Huntington.
R.  H.  Porter.
Horace  Chase.
H.  S.  Baker.
David  Murray.
Edward  A.  Rollins.
Dennison  Currier.
C.  W.  Hodgdon.
Herman  Remiek.
Cyrus  Fowler.
Samuel  M.  Wilcox.
John  H.  Kowell.
John  S.  Kidder.
James  Tucker.
Jonathan  E.  Sargent.
Ezra  C.  Knight.
William  N.Litchfield.
Thos.  E.  Chamberlin.
Jas.  L.  Chamberlin.
C.  C.  Fellows.
Ai  B.  Thompson.
GRAND  CHAPTER.
Organized  5819.
This  Grand  Chapter  is  subordinate  to  the  General  Grand  Chapter.  It  holds
its  Annual  Convocations  at  Concord,  on  the  second  Monday  in  June.  It  has  8
subordinate  Chapters  under  its  jurisdiction,  7  of  which  made  returns  at  the
Annual  Convocation  in  June,  5860,  showing  a  total  of  members  of  542,  and
78  exaltations  during  the  year,  and  amount  of  dues  paid  $156.

--- Sayfa 272 ---
2G0
world's  masonic  register.
SUBORDINATE  CHAPTERS.
No.      Name.
Location.
No.       Name.
Location.
2  Trinity,
Concord.
6  Webb,
Claremont.
3  Washington,
Portsmouth.
7  Belknap,
Dover.
4  Cheshire,
Keene.
9  Meridian  Sun,
Nashua.
5  Franklin,
Lisbon.
11  Mount  Horeb,
Manchester.
GRAND    COMMANDERY.
Okganized  August  22,  1860.
There  are  5  subordinate  Commanderies  in  this  jurisdiction,  all  instituted  by
the  Grand  Encampment  of  the  United  States,  as  follows  :  No.  1,  De  Witt  Clin-
ton, at  Portsmouth;  chartered  January,  1826.  No.  2,  Trinity,  at  Manchester;
chartered  September  19th,  1853.  No.  3,  North  Star,  dispensation  May  6th,
1857,  at  Lancaster.  No.  4,  St.  Paul's,  dispensation  November,  1857,  at  Dover.
No.  5,  Mount  Horeb,  dispensation  May  31st,  1859,  at  Concord.  These  three
last  Commanderies  were  chartered  by  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the  United
States,  at  its  triennial  meeting  in  September,  1859.  The  total  number  of  mem-
bers reported  in  1859  was  210.
This  Grand  Encampment  was  organized  as  above  since  the'  last  triennial
meeting  of  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the  United  States.
SUBSCRIBERS'  NAMES.
BXETEE.
Bell,  Chas.  H.    W.  M.,  Star  in  the  East,  59.
MILFOBD.
Blood,  James,  B.  B.  Station  Agent.     J.  Std.,  Benevolent,  7.
Gillis,  G.  H.,  Clerk  and  Paymaster,  Sauhegan  Manufacturing  Company.
J.  W.,  Benevolent,  7  ;  Meridian  Sun  chap.,  9.
Hutchinson,  Nathan,  Livery  Stable  Keeper.     S.  D.,  Benevolent,  7.
Bobbins,  Wm.  "W".,  Manufacturer  of  Printers'  Cases  and  Furniture.  Benevo-
lent, 7.
Sawyer,  Salmon,  Millwright.     Benevolent,  7.
Wadleigh,  Bainbridge,  Attorney  and  Counselor  at  Law.    Benevolent,  7.
Wadleigh,  Gilbert,  Cashier  Sauhegan  Bank.     Marshal,  Benevolent,  7.
NASHUA.
Marshall,  Isaac  H.   W.  M.,  Bising  Sun,  39 ;  E.  King,  Meridian  Sun  chap.,  9.
Bockwood,  Jefferson,  Painter,  Glazier,  and  Undertaker.     Bising  Sun,  39.

--- Sayfa 273 ---
NEW  JERSEY.
GRAND   LODGE.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  New  Jersey  was  organized  December  18,  5786.  Its
Annual  Communications  are  held  on  the  first  "Wednesday  after  the  second  Tues-
day in  January,  in  the  City  of  Trenton.  The  Grand  Lodge  consists  of  the  Grand
Officers,  Past  Grand  Officers,  Past  Masters,  and  Masters  and  Wardens  of  its
subordinate  Lodges.  The  revenue  of  the  Grand  Lodge  is  derived  from  the  fol-
lowing sources : —
For  Charters  for  new  Lodges
$25  00
Each  member,  annually,  for  general  Charity  Fund      .  50
For  every  Initiation
1  00
For  Dispensation  for  the  Degrees        ....  4  00
For  Certificates
1  00
There  are  54  subordinate  Lodges  in  this  jurisdiction.  The  number  of  members
reported,  per  last  returns,  was  2723  ;  Entered  Apprentices,  32  ;  Fellow  Crafts,
38;  Withdrawn,  111 ;  Suspended,  77 ;  Deceased,  33 ;  Expelled,  5.  The  receipts
of  the  Grand  Lodge,  as  per  report  of  Grand  Secretary  for  the  year  ending
January  17,  5860,  were  $1293  25.
The  present  Officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  are  as  follows  : —
Isaac  Van  Wagoner,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
Haley  Fisk,  R.  W.  Deputy  Grand  Master.
Robert  C.  Buzby,  R.  W.  Senior  Grand  Warden.
Thomas  J.  Corson,  R.  W.  Junior  Grand  Warden.
Rev.  Nathaniel  Pettit,  R.  W.  Grand  Chaplain.
Elias  Phillips,  R.  W.  Grand  Treasurer.
Joseph  H.  Hough,  R.  W.  Grand  Secretary.
Ingham  Coryell,  R.  W.  Deputy  Grand  Secretary.
Samuel  Lilly,  W.  Senior  Grand  Deacon.
Edward  C.  Taylor,  W.  Junior  Grand  Deacon.
John  Rogers,  W.  Grand  Marshal.
Robert  O.  Smith,  1  w_  Grand  Stewards.
Holmes  W.  Murphy,     )
Charles  Dunham,  Jr.,  W.  Grand  Sword  Bearer.
Robert  S.  Green,  W.  Grand  Pursuivant.
Amos  Howell,  Grand  Tyler.
No.  Lodoe.
1  St.  John's,
2  Brearly,
3  Cincinnati,
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.
Location.
Newark.
Bridgeton.
Morristown.
Time  op  Meeting.
2d  &  4th  Weds.
Mon.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Masteu.
Aug.  L.  Wilcox.
John  Carter.
John  S.  Stiger.
(261)

--- Sayfa 274 ---
262
world's  masonic  register.
No.
Lodge.
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
4  Tuckerton,
5  Trenton,
7  Newark,
8  Clinton,
9  Wash.  Shre'ry,
10  Franklin,
11  Union,
12  Amwell,
13  Warren,
14  Mount  Holly,
15  Camden,
16  Olive  Branch,
17  Hiram,
18  Harmony,
19  Union,
20  Acacia,
21  Mys.  Bro'hood,
22  Diogenes,
23  Harmony,
24  Prospect,
25  Northern,
26  Jerusalem,
27  Lafayette,
28  Mount  Moriah,
29  Joppa,
30  Cape  Island,
31  Variek,
32  Burlington,
33  Washington,
34  Stewart,
35  Hoboken,
36  Mansfield,
37  Darcy,
38  Princeton,
39  Eureka,
40  Bloomfield,
41  Hightstown,
42  Independence,
43  Pat'son  Orange
44  Central,
45  Benevolent,
46  Solomon's,
47  Bergen,
48  Enterprise,
49  Essex,
50  Mercer,
51  Oriental,
52  Delaware,
53  Eagle,
Tuckerton.
Trenton.
Newark.
Baskinridge.
Eatontown.
Irvington.
Orange.
Lambertville.
Belvidere.
Mount  Holly.
Camden.
Freehold.
Jersey  City.
Tom's  River.
New  Brunswick.
Dover.
Red  Bank.
Newark.
Newton.
Mendham.
Newark.
Plainfield.
Rahway.
Bordentown.
Paterson.
Cape  Island.
Jersey  City.
Burlington.
Elizabeth.
Clinton.
Hoboken.
Washington.
Flemington.
Princeton.
Newark.
Bloomfield.
Hightstown.
Hackettstown.
Paterson.
Mount  Holly.
Paterson.
Somerville.
Bergen.
Jersey  City.
Elizabethport.
Trenton.
Newark.
Phillipsburg.
Hudson.
Monday  before  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Every  Friday.
Wed.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
Wed.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Friday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
3d  Tuesday.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Every  Monday.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
Th.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
2d  &  4th  Weds.
2d  &  4th  Weds.
1st  Tu.  on  or  a.  f.  m.
Every  Friday.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Every  Friday.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Every  Thursday.
Thurs.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  MondayB.
Every  Tuesday.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
1st  Fri.  after  f.  m.
Friday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Every  Thursday.
Friday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Every  Friday.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
Every  Thursday.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
2d  &  4th  Thursdays.
Every  Wednesday.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Every  Monday.
Stephen  Willits.
W.  W.  L.  Phillips.
Jos.  K.  Lewis.
Stephen  Faulkner.
Arthur  Wilson.
Hiram  Ingalsbc.
Chas.  A.  Skillman.
Edwin  R.  Crane.
Chas.  Ewan,  Jr.
Pancoast  Roberts.
Isaac  S.  Buckalew.
Albert  G.  Gilkyson.
Thos.  Hooper.
Saml.  L.  Johnson.
Thos.  R.  Crittenden.
Jas.  H.  Patterson.
John  Hammell.
David  N.  Deazley.
Wm.  Mead.
Stephen  O.  Horton.
Abram  A.  Ward.
John  Shaw.
John  Bobertson.
Virgil  M.  D.  Marcy.
Philip  Sellew.
Saml.  Fort.
Jacob  Seiple.
Edward  Bootes.
Alex.  P.  Berthoud.
Jacob  S.  C.  Pittinger.
Cor.  Van  Duyne.
Milton  Baldwin.
Simeon  Baldwin.
E.  T.  R.  Applegate.
E.  Pierce  Allen.
Socrates  Tuttle.
Wm.  H.  Irick.
John  E.  Bolton.
John  Hartwell.
John  R.  Montgomery.
Chancellor  W.  Chase.
Jos.  Alward.
Jas.  S.  Aitkin.
Francis  Lindsley.
Ed.  H.  Bird.
John  Duff.

--- Sayfa 275 ---
NEW  JERSEY.
263
No.       Lodob.
Location.                             Time  op  Mbetino.
Master.
54    Excelsior,
U.  D.  Kane,
Newark.
U.  D.  Orion,
Frenchtown.
U.  D.  Corinthian,
Orange.
GRAND  CHAPTER.
Organized  December  30th,  5856.
This  Grand  Chapter  is  subordinate  to  the  General  Grand  Chapter.  It  holds
its  Annual  Convocations  on  the  second  Wednesday  in  September,  in  the  City  of
Trenton.  It  has  12  subordinate  Chapters  under  its  jurisdiction.  Number  of
members,  419.
SUBORDINATE  CHAPTERS.
No.       Name.
1  Hiram,
2  Enterprise,
3  Boudinot,
4  Scott,
5  Three  Times  Three,
6  Brearly,
7  Union,
8  Mount  Vernon,
9  Harmony,
10  Cataract  City,
11  Pentalpha,
12  Temple,
Location.
Eatontown.
Jersey  City.
Burlington.
New  Brunswick.
Trenton.
Bridgeton.
Newark.
Bergen.
Newark.
Paterson.
Hoboken.
Phillipsburg.
Time  op  Meeting.
1st  Monday  after  full  moon.
1st  &  3d  Wednesdays.
4th  Wednesday.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
2d  Tuesday.
Monday  after  full  moon.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
2d  &  4th  Wednesdays.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
2d  Tuesday.
GRAND    COUNCIL.
Organized  November  26th,  5860.
This  Grand  Council  was  organized  by  three  Councils  established  in  New
Jersey,  viz. ;  Kane  Council,  No.  11,  at  Newark,  by  the  Grand  Council  of  New
York,  and  Scott  Council,  No.  12,  at  New  Brunswick,  and  Gebal  Council,  No.
14,  at  Trenton,  by  the  Grand  Council  of  Pennsylvania.  On  the  same  day,  the
Grand  Council  held  its  first  Annual  Assembly  at  the  same  place,  City  of  New
Brunswick,  elected  its  Officers,  and,  among  other  business,  granted  a  warrant
for  a  new  Council.  The  next  Annual  Assembly  of  the  Grand  Council  will  be
held  in  the  City  of  Trenton,  on  the  third  Tuesday  of  January,  5861.
SUBORDINATE   COUNCILS.
No.
Name.
Location.
No.
Name.
Location.
1 Scott,
New  Brunswick.
3 Gebal,
Trenton.
2 Kane,
Newark.
4
Delta,
Hoboken

--- Sayfa 276 ---
264  world's  masonic  register.
GRAND  COMMANDERT.
The  Grand  Commandery  of  New  Jersey  was  organized  on  the  14th  of  Feb-
ruary, 1860.  It  is  subordinate  to  the  Grand  Encampment  of  U.  S.  Its  first
Conclave  was  held  in  the  City  of  Trenton,  on  the  5th  of  June,  1860.  According
to  the  Constitution  adopted,  "  The  Annual  Conclave  of  this  Grand  Commandery
shall  be  held  on  the  first  Thursday  after  the  second  Wednesday  in  September."
The  Grand  Commandery  was  formed  of  the  following  subordinate  Command-
SUBORDINATE  COMMANDERIES.
No.  Namb.  Location.  No.    Name.  Location.
1  Hugh  De  Payen,  Jersey  City.  3  Helena,  Burlington.
2  St.  Bernard,  Hightstown.
The  Annual  Conclave  of  the  Grand  Commandery  was  held  in  the  City  of
Trenton,  on  the  15th  of  September,  1860.  No  increase  of  subordinate  Com-
manderies.
SUBSCRIBERS'  NAMES.
BELVTDEKB.
Crane,  Edwin  R.     W.  M.,  Warren,  13.
Fritts,  Wm.  A.,  Hotel-keeper.    Warren,  13.
Harris,  Henry  V.,  Teller  Belvidere  Bank.    Warren,  13.
Prall,  James,  Merchant.     Warren,  13.
Sharp,  Jacob,  Tanner.     P.  M.,  Warren,  13.
Sharp,  Bedford.     S.  D.,  Warren,  13.
Smith,  Thomas  L.,  Butcher.    J.  W.,  Warren,  13.
Woodward,  J.  B.,  Teacher.    Late  Mansfield,  36.
BOBDEMTO'WIir.
Allen,  Col.  Joseph  W.,  Civil  Engineer.     Mount  Moriah,  28.
Buzby,  Charles  C,  Pattern-maker.    J.  W.,  Mount  Moriah,  28.
Buzby,  Robert  C,  Confidential  Clerk,  Camden  and  Amboy  R.  R.  Senior
Grand  Warden,  Grand  Lodge  N.  J. ;  P.  M.,  Mount  Moriah,  28.
Cook,  Dr.  William.    Mount  Moriah,  28.
Dayton,  Richard  B.,  Engineer.    Mount  Moriah,  28.
Dougherty,  Samuel  B.,  Superintendent  Camden  and  Amboy  Railroad.  Mount
Moriah,  28.
Dunn,  Thomas  W.,  Car  Trimmer.    S.  D.,  Mount  Moriah,  28.
Haffelfinger,  William  R.,  Carpenter.     Mount  Moriah,  28.
Molyneux,  James,  Engineer.     Mount  Moriah,  28.
Pitman,  George  W.,  Cabinet-maker,  Camden  and  Amboy  Railroad.  J.  0.,
Mount  Moriah,  28.
Stokes,  Whitall,  Druggist.    Mount  Moriah,  28.
Thompson,  Alfred,  Foundery.    Mount  Moriah,  28.

--- Sayfa 277 ---
NEW  JERSEY.  265
Thompson,  George  W.,  Merchant.    Mount  Moriah,  28.
Thompson,  Lewis  P.,  Clerk.    Mount  Moriah,  28.
Williamson,  Peter,  Engineer.    Sec,  Mount  Moriah,  28.
CAMDEN.
Allen,  Vm.  H.,  Manufacturer  of  Stoves,  Heaters,  and  Ranges,  8  Market  St.
Camden,  15.
Aydelott,  John,  Pilot  of  Steamboat  State  Rights.    Camden,  15.
Bender,  Joseph  J.,  House  and  Sign  Painter,  Front,  above  Federal  St.
Camden,  15.
Cassady,  James  M.,  Magistrate,  Federal-  St.    Secretary,  Camden,  15.
Davis,  John  T.,  House  and  Sign  Painter,  Market,  below  Front  St.  Camden,  15.
Denny,  James  H.,  House  and  Sign  Painter,  Front,  above  Federal  St.
Camden,  15.
Doughty,  Samuel,  Captain  of  Steamboat  Washington.     Camden,  15.
Fetters,  Richard,  Florist,  218  Market  St.     Camden,  15.
Hamell,  Benj.  A.,  Commission  Merchant,  foot  of  Federal  St.     Camden,  15.
Hamell,  Joseph  R.,  Agent,  Cooper's  Point.     Camden,  15.
Letts,  Michael,  Collector  Camden  and  Philadelphia  Ferry  Co.     Camden,  15.
Mayhew,  Mark  A.,  Lumber  Inspector,  cor.  Fourth  and  Plum  Sts.   Camden.  15.
Mott,  George,  Marble-yard,  Federal  St.     Camden,  15.
Parker,  Chas.  F.,  Bookbinder,  524  North  Second  St.     J.  W.,  Camden,  15.
Peak,  Jesse  T.,  Tailor,  cor.  Second  and  Federal  Sts.     Camden,  15.
Pierson,  Jr.,  Daniel,  House  Carpenter,  cor.  Third  and  Sailor's  Avenue.
Camden,  15.
Roberts,  Azael,  Shoe  Store,  N.  W.  cor.  Second  and  Federal  Sts.    Camden,  15.
Roberts,  Pantacost,  Undertaker,  cor.  3d  and  Federal  Sts.  W.  M.,  Camden,
15.
Scovel,  James  M.,  Attorney  at  Law,  N.  E.  cor.  3d  and  Market  Sts.  Camden,
15.
Stevens,  James  H.,  Cashier  of  Farmers'  and  Mechanics'  Bank  of  Camden,  506.
Federal  St.     S.  D.,  Camden,  15.
Trimble,  Joseph,  327  Cooper  St.     Past  Grand  Master,  Camden,  15.
CHAETBEKHY.
Holmes,  Curtis  R.,  M.D.    Wooster,  10  ;  Colchester  coun.
Isham,  Rev.  R.  Griswold.    Wooster,  10 ;    formerly   Chap.,  5 ;    Colchester
conn. ;  St.  Bernard's  com.,  2.
ELIZABETH.
Alward,  Joseph,  Attorney  at  Law.     W.  M.,  Essex,  49.
Bonnett,  W.  W.,    Piatt,  194,  N.  Y. ;  Harmony  chap.,  9,  Newark,  N.  J.
Brown,  John  W.,  Hardware.     Washington,  33.
Cammann,  C.  A.,  Ferry  Agent.    Essex,  49.
Christopher,  Geo.  W.,  Carpenter.     Essex,  49.
Curren,  H.  0.,  Oil  Cloths,  173  Mechanic  St.    J.  D.,  Washington,  33.
Davis,  Jno.,  Coal  Agent.    Lodge,  No.  3  ;  Jerusalem  chap.,  3,  Phila.
Dixon,  Timothy,  Silver-plater.    Essex,  49.

--- Sayfa 278 ---
266  world's  masonic  register.
Green,  Jr.,  James  S.,  Physician,  151  Broad  St.     P.  M.,  Washington,  33.
Green,  Eob.  J.,  Counselor  at  Law,  161  Broad  St.  P.  M.,  Washington,  33  ;
G.  P.  of  G.  L.  of  State  of  N.  J.
Hambrick,  Paul  E.     Secretary,  Washington,  33.
Hicks,  Benj.,  Druggist.     Essex,  49.
Hough,  T.  L.,  Physician  and  Druggist.    Essex,  49.
Joslin,  Wm.,  Engineer.    J.  D.,  Essex,  49.
Milligan,  Saml.  G.    Washington,  33.
Moore,  0.  D.,  Engineer.     Steward,  Essex,  49.
Moore,  Saml.  K.,  Machinist.     Essex,  49 ;  Union  chap.,  Newark,  N.  J.
Norton,  Henry  L.,  Clerk.     S.  D.,  Essex,  49.
Pierson,  Benj.  C,  Grocer,  216  Broad  St.     Washington,  33.
Price,  Thos.  H.,  Carriage-maker,  209|  Broad  St.    Washington,  33.
Bobinson,  Oscar  B.     Essex,  49.
Rolston,  R  G.,  125  Jersey  St.     J.  W.,  Washington,  33.
Seiple,  J.,  City  Clerk.     W.  M.,  Washington,  33.
Smith,  A.  W.,  52  Meadow  St.     S.  D.,  Washington,  33.
Smith,  Wm.,  Dispatcher.     Essex,  49.
White,  Thomas,  Carpenter.    Essex,  49.
Whitehead,  S.  W.,  Druggist,  171  Broad,  cor.  Jersey  St.  S.  W.,  Washing-
ton, 33.
Wyckoff,  P.  H.,  Clerk.     J.  W.,  Essex,  49.
FLEMING-TOUT.
Clark,  Peter  I.,  Attorney  at  Law.     Darcy,  37.
Bisler,  M.  B.,  Merchant.     Darcy,  37.
Schenk,  J.  P.,  M.D.     P.  M.,  Darcy,  37  ;  Chap.,  5.
HACKETTSTOWBT.
Ford,  Marcus,  Brakesman,  Morris  and  Essex  Bailroad.  S.  D.,  Independence,
42.
McClallen,  S.  M.,  Harness-maker  and  Dealer  in  Fancy  Saddlery.  Independ-
ence, 42.
Moore,  C.  F.  B.,  Grocer  and  Confectioner.     Independence,  42  ;  Chap.,  7.
Moore,  C.  F.  B.,  Engineer.     Rockaway,  20;  Union  chap.,  1.
Osborne,  Wm.,  Locomotive  Engineer.     S.  W.,  Independence,  42.
HIGHTSTOWIT.
Applegate,  E.  B.,  Banker.  W.  M.,  Hightstown,  41 ;  Chap.,  5  ;  J.  W.,  Grand
Encampment ;  C.  G.,  St.  Bernard's  com.,  2.
Applegate,  Thomas.     Treas.,  Hightstown,  41.
Coward,  Geo.  W.,  Merchant.  J.  W.,  Hightstown,  41;  Chap.,  5 ;  St.  Ber-
nard's com.,  2.
Hall,  James  D.    J.  W.,  Hightstown,  41 ;  'St.  Bernard's  com.,  2.
Keeler,  Charles,  Merchant.  S.  W.,  Hightstown,  41 ;  Chap.,  5 ;  Generalissimo,
St.  Bernard  com.,  2.
Bobbins,  Charles  L.,  Merchant.  S.  D.,  Hightstown,  41 ;  Chap.,  5  ;  Recorder,
St.  Bernard's  com.,  2.

--- Sayfa 279 ---
NEW  JERSEY.  261
Scattergood,  Samuel  B.,  Rail-road  Hotel.    P.  M.,  Trenton,  5.
Shengle,  Serring,  Pounder  and  Machinist.    Sec,  Hightstown,  41.
Taylor,  Edward  0.,  Broker.    P.  M.,  Hightstown,  41 ;  Chap.,  5  ;  Eastern  Star
coun. ;  D.  G.  0.,  Grand  Encampment ;  P.  E.  C,  St.  Bernard's  com.,  2.
Taylor,  Wm.  W.     P.  M.,  Hightstown,  41 ;  Chap.,  5  ;   E.  C,  St.  Bernard's
com.,  2.
JAMESBTJKG.
Buckelew,  Isaac  S.,  Superintendent  Freehold  and  Jamesburg  R.  R.    W.  M.,
Olive  Branch,  16 ;  Hiram  chap.,  1 ;  0.  G.,  St.  Bernard  com.,  2.
LAMBEETVILLE.
Everett,  Richard  C,  Station  Agent,  Belvidere  and  Delaware  R.  R.  Amwell,  12.
Keiper,  Wm.  N.,  Miller.     Amwell,  12.
Lake,  Joseph.  B.,  Carpenter.     Amwell,  12.
Linburg,  "Wm.,  Dry  Goods  Merchant.     Amwell,  12.
Moore,  Amos,  Jr.,  Hotel-keeper.    Amwell,  12.
Moore,  Francis,  Machinist.     Tyler,  Amwell,  12.
Pierson,  Clark,  Editor  and  Publisher  "People's  Beacon."    Amwell,  12.
Scarborough,  A.  J.,  Tobacconist.     Amwell,  12.
Schulhaus,  Charles,  Merchant  Tailor.     J.  W.,  Amwell,  12  ;  Chap.,  5  ;  Phila-
delphia coun.,  11.
Servis,  Jacob,  Fancy  Goods  and  Dress  Trimmings.     Treas.,  Amwell,  12.
Young,  John  R.,  Merchant.    Amwell,  12.
LEBANOM"
Trefren,  Mastern  D.,  Attorney  at  Law.    P.  M.,  Stewart,  34.
MOUNT  HOLLY.
Bryan,  "Wm.  E.,  Postmaster.     P.  M.,  Mount  Holly,  14.
Carr,  Samuel,  Cordwainer.     Mount  Holly,  14.
Irick,  Henry  J.,  Farmer,  near  Mount  Holly.     J.  W.,  Central,  44.
Read,  Samuel,  Bricklayer.     Tuckerton,  4 ;   P.  M.,  Mount  Holly,  14 ;   Past
Deputy  Grand  Master.
hewakb:.
Allen,  Ludlow,  Machinist,  123  Broad  Street.     M.  C,  Northern,  25  ;  C.  H.,
Harmony  chap.,  9 ;  Kane  coun.,  2.
Baldwin,  Milton,  M.D.,  58  Bank  Street.   W.  M.,  Eureka,  39 ;  Union  chap.,  7
Baldwin,  R.  D.,  Supt.  Newark  Gaslight  Co.,  4  Morris  and  Essex  Railroad
Avenue.    Northern,  25.
Baxter,  Morgan  T.,  Flour,  Feed,  and  Groceries,  378  and  378£  Broad  Street.
Secretary,  Oriental,  51.
Bender,  Peter,  Hatter,  276  Broad  Street.    P.  M.,  Diogenes,  22.
Benjamin,  0.  C,  Photograph  Gallery,  274  Broad  Street.     Northern,  25.
Blauvelt,  John  S.,  Shoe  Manufacturer,  138  Market  Street.     Newark,  7.
Boylan,  Lawrence,  Furniture  Dealer,  245  Broad  Street.     Newark,  7  ;  Union
chap.,  7.
Brant,  W.  H.,  Undertaker,  178  Broad  Street.    Newark,  7  ;  Union  chap.,  7.
18

--- Sayfa 280 ---
268  world's  masonic  register.
Bright,  Jas.,  Baker,  2  Commerce  Street.    Newark,  7.
Butts,  Philip,  Merchant  Tailor,  3  Ferry  Street.    Newark,  7.
Camfield,  David  J.,  Livery  Stables,  232  Washington  Street.  Newark,  7 ;
Secretary,  Union  chap.,  7.
Cleaver,  James  D.,  County  Judge,  118  Orchard  Street.    Treas.,  Oriental,  51.
Compton,  Chas.  W.,  Undertaker,  178  Market  Street.     Kane,  U.  D.
Corey,  J.  "W.,  Hats,  Caps,  Furs,  and  Straw  Goods,  232  Broad  Street.  Kane,
U.  D. ;  Union  chap.,  7.
Crane,  Job  S.,  Lock  Manufacturer,  6  Mechanic  Street.     Newark,  7.
Crockett,  John  R.,  Manufacturer,  55  Mount  Pleasant  Avenue.  Northern,
25  ;  P.  M.,  Newark,  7 ;  Treas.,  Harmony  chap.,  9 ;  P.  S.  G.  W.,  Grand  Lodge.
Crowder,  Chas.,  Clothier,  238  Broad  Street.     Kane,  U.  D.
Duryee,  H.  W.,  24  Park  Street.     St.  John's,  1.
Eagles,  Israel  C,  Wagon  and  Carriage  Maker,  82  and  84  Orange  Street.
Northern,  25.
Eagles,  Wm.  C,  Carpenter,  276  Broad  Street.    Newark,  7.
Erb,  William,  Curled  Hair  Manufacturer  and  Upholsterer,  53  Broad  Street.
Northern,  25.
Fleichaus,  Joseph,  Tanner,  28  Mercer  Street.     S.  D.,  Diogenes,  22.
Fredericks,  N.  J.,  Sash,  Blind,  and  Door  Manufacturer,  8  Church  Street.
Newark,  7.
Fuller,  Edw.  N.,  Editor  of  Newark  Daily  Journal.     Oriental,  51.
Garratt,  Chas.,  Clothier,  2  New  Street.     Eureka,  39  ;  Union  chap.,  7.
Geiger,  John,  File  and  Rasp  Manufacturer,  corner  Hamilton  and  Bailroad
Avenues.    Diogenes,  22.
Gifford,  Chas.  L.  C,  Counselor  at  Law,  169  Broad  Street.  S.  W.,  Northern,
25  ;  Harmony  chap.,  9.
Green,  J.  H.,  Carriage  Manufacturer,  120  Bailroad  Avenue.     Newark,  7.
Grover,  Jas.  W.,  Secretary  Merchants'  Insurance  Company,  264  Broad  Street.
Newark,  7.
Haines,  James,  Counselor  at  Law,  14  Parker  Street.     Oriental,  51.
Hammel,  John,  Clothier,  172  Market  Street.     W.  M.,  Diogenes,  22.
Hammell,  Chas.,  Provisions,  247  Broad  Street.     Northern,  25.
Harfele,  Francis,  Union  Hall,  31  Union  Street.     Diogenes,  22.
Harrison,  Chas.  H.,  Patent  Leather,  436  AYashington  Street.  S.  W.,  Eureka,
39 ;  Union  chap.,  7.
Harrison,  C.  W.,  Teller  Newark  Savings  Institution,  cor.  Broad  and  Mechanic
Streets.     Treas.,  St.  John's,  1.
Hart,  Morris,  Dry  Goods,  16  New  Street.     Northern,  25.
Hawes,  J.  H.  G.,  Plumber  and  Gas-fitter,  158  Market  Street.  J.  D.,  North-
ern, 25  ;  P.  S.,  Harmony  chap.,  9 ;  Kane  coun.,  2.
Heaton,  B.  F.,  Clothing,  141  Market  St.     St.  John's,  1.
Hedges,  A.  J.,  Manufacturing  Jeweler,  43  Fair  St.  St.  John's,  1 ;  Union
chap.,  7.
Hedden,  V.  J.,  Carpenter,  1  Orange  St.  Northern,  25 ;  Harmony  chap.,  9  ;
Kane  coun.
Hudson,  W.  E.,  Grocer,  52  Warren,  cor.  Plane  St.     Kane,  U.  D.

--- Sayfa 281 ---
NEW   JERSEY.  269
Huxster,  Wm.  B.,  Baker  and  Grocer,  44  Ferry  St.    Newark,  7 ;   Union
chap.,  7.
Jacobus,  J.  M.,  Builder,  73  State  St.    Treasurer,  Northern,  25  ;  Harmony
chap.,  9.
Johnston,  James,  Butcher,  41  Mulberry  St.     Kane,  U.  D.
Kearney,  James,  File  Manufacturer,  15  Hamilton  St.    Oriental,  51.
Kinney,  W.  Donaldson,  Merchant,  27  Centre  St.     W.  M.,  Kane,  TJ.  D. ;
M.  E.  H.  P.,  Union  chap.,  7 ;  Kane  coun.
Lang,  J.  M.,  Sash,  Blind,  and  Door  Manufacturer,  151  Railroad  Avenue.
St.  John's,  1.
Lawson,  W.  W.,  Boots  and  Shoes,  206  Broad  St.    Newark,  7.
Lindsley,  F.,  Harness,  206  Market  St.     W.  M.,  Oriental,  51.
Marsh,  Lewis  H,,  Wine  and  Liquor  Dealer,  372  Broad  St.     Oriental,  51.
Mead,  Benj.  F.,  Merchant,  20  Bast  Kinney  St.     Kane,  U.  D.
Mead,  Wm.,  Dentist,  111  Broad  St.     W.  M.,  Northern,  25;  K.,  Harmony
chap.,  9  ;  Master,  Kane  coun.
Mills,  John,  Hats,  Caps,  and  Furs,  202  Broad  St.     Oriental,  51.
Moore,  Geo.  B.,  Manufacturer,  32  Cottage  St.     St.  John's,  1.
Miiller,  Bmil,  Shoemaker,  4  Green  St.     Diogenes,  22.
Passmore,  Wm.,  Manufacturer  of   Marble   Monuments   and   Mantels,  146
Market  St.     Newark,  7.
Randell,  Geo.  D.,  Manufacturer  of  Patent  Self- Rocking  Cradles,  cor.  Hamil-
ton and  Bruen  St.     Oriental,  51.
Randall,  Wm.  N,  Furniture  Store,  245  Broad  St.     Newark,  7.
Ross,  John  J.,  Clothing,  30  Elm  St.     St.  John's,  1.
Rutan,  Jr.,  W.  D.,  Clerk  Post-office,i41  Plane  St.     S.  D.,  Kane,  U.  D.
Sayre,  T.  F.,  Grocer,  412  Broad  St.     Oriental,  51.
Shipley,  Amos,  Silver-plater,  38  Franklin  St.     Newark,  7 ;  Union  chap.,  7.
Sinclair,  Thos.,  Machinist,  15  Orange  St.     Northern,  25.
Smith,  E.  M.,  Builder,  81  West  Kenny  St.     Captain  Host,  Union  chap.,  7  ;
Kane  coun.
Smith,  Geo.  N,  Hardware,  81  Broad  St.     Northern,  25.
Smith,  Jas.  M.,  Butcher,  105  Plane  St.     Newark,  7.
Snyder,  Jno.  A.,  Livery  Stables,  113  Washington  St.     J.  D.,  Newark,  7  ;
S.,  Union  chap.,  7.
Sproston,  John,  Accountant,  12  New  St.     S.  W.,  Kane,  U.  D.
Steeple,  John  E.,  172  Walnut  St.     Newark,  7  ;  Union  chap.,  7.
Terhune,  D.  J.,  Boot  and  Shoe  Manufacturer,  142  Market  St.     Newark,  7.
Terhune,  Jas.  J.,  Shoe  Manufacturer,  143  Market  St.     P.  M.,  Oriental,  51 ;
Union  chap.,  7  ;  Kane  coun.
Thurston,  Chas.  B.,  Dentist,  306  Plane  St.     Treasurer,  Eureka,  39 ;  Union
''chap.,  7  ;  Kane  coun.
Tobin,  John,  90  Orchard  St.     Oriental,  51 ;  Union  chap.,  7.
Triuder,  William,  Druggist,  149  Plane  St.     Newark,  7.
Tronson,  Luke  F.,  Master  Machinist,  Morris  and  Essex  Railroad,  66  State  St.
Northern,  25  ;  M.  of  2d  V.,  Harmony  chap.,  9;  Kane  coun.
Vallentine,  Oscar  J.,  Manufacturing  Jeweler,  63  Columbia  St.     P.  M.,  New-
ark, 7;  Union  chap.,'7.

--- Sayfa 282 ---
270  world's  masonic  register.
Van  Gieson,  Eugene  T.,  Machinist,  15  Arch  St.    Northern,  25.
Tan  Gieson,  W.  H.,  Machinist,  47  Clinton  St.     Northern,  25.
Volk,  Francis,  Hatter,  159  Market  St.     Eureka,  39.
Ward,  Henry  A.,  Accountant,  13  South  Orange  Avenue.     Secy.,  Kane,  U.  D.
Wheeler,  C.  W.,  Merchant,  273  Broad  St.     Kane,  U.  D.
Whitehead,  A.  B.,  Druggist,  11  Beach  St.  Kane,  U.  D. ;  Union  chap.,  7  ;
Kane  coun.
Wilcox,  Augustus  L.,  Salesman,  451  Washington  St.     W.  M.,  St.  John's,  1.
Wilde,  Richard  W.,  Accountant,  34  Liberty  St.  Treas.,  Kane,  U.  D. ;  Union
chap.,  7  ;  Kane  coun.
Winans,  William  H.,  Book  and  Job  Printer,  297  Broad  St.    Newark,  7.
Winters,  Robert  C,  Collar  Manufacturer,  5  North  Lawrence  St.  J.  W.,
Eureka,  39.
Wackermann,  Michael,  Tinsmith,  Stoves,  etc.,  88  Market  St.     Eureka,  39.
Woodhull,  William  M.,  273  Washington  St.     Kane,  U.  D.
Woodruff,  A.  G-.,  Hatter,  2  Beach  St.     Newark,  7.
Zeh,  Charles  M.,  M.D.,  113  Orange  St.  P.  M.,  Northern,  25  ;  M.  E.  H.  P.,
Harmony  chap.,  9  ;  111.  M.,  Kane  coun.
Zimmerman,  Philip,  Bookseller,  26  Beacon  St.    J.  D.,  Diogenes,  22.
NEW  BRUNSWICK.
Butler,  George,  Sash,  Door,  and  Blind  Manufacturer,  John  St.     Union,  19.
Janeway,  Henry  L.,  Paper  Manufacturer.     Union,  19.
Martin,  George  W.,  Grocery,  cor.  Hiram  and  Neilson  Sts.  Secty.,  Union,
19 ;  Sec,  Scott  chap.,  4.
HEW  HAMPTON.
Rickard,  Isaac,  Engineer.     Richmond,  230,  Pa.;  Columbia,  M.  L.,  91,  Phila.
ORANGE.
Baldwin,  J.  P.,  Postmaster,  Canfleld  St.     Union,  11 ;  Union  chap.,  7  ;  Kane
coun.
Brittan,  Andrew,  80  Main  St.     W.  M.,  Corinthian,  U.  D.
Dodd,  R.  W.,  Flour  and  Feed,  20  Main  St.     Union,  11 .
Ingalsbee,  H.,  Merchant,  3  Library  Buildings.     W.  M.,  Union,  11.
Larsoneur,  F.,  Book-keeper,  High  St.     Union,  11.
Lindsley,  J.  B.,  Butcher,  Masonic  Hall.     Union  11.
PATERSON.
Daggers,  John  R.  Oglethorp,  47 ;  Darley  chap.,  7  ;  Hope  coun.,  4,  all  of
Columbus,  Ga. ;  St.  Omer  com.,  2,  Macon,  Ga. ;  M.  E.  H.  P.,  Cataract  City
chap.,  U.  D.
Derrom,  A.,  Builder,  Proprietor  of  the  Derrom  Steam  Carpentry,  32  West  St.
Paterson  Orange,  43.
Gibson,  James  T.,  residence,  107  Mill  Street.     Treas.,  Benevolent,  45.
Hays,  Robert,  Copper-smith,  298  Straight  St.  Joppa,  29  ;  K,  Cataract  City
chap.,  U.  D.

--- Sayfa 283 ---
NEW   JERSEY.  211
Irish,  H.  C,  Printer  and  Publisher,  cor.  Broadway  and  Main.  S.  W.,
Paterson  Orange,  43.
Mitchell,  John,  Overseer  Rogers'  Locomotive  and  Machine  Works,  residence,
105  Jersey  Street.     Paterson  Orange,  43.
Ramage,  John,  Paper-maker,  158  Grand  St.  Benevolent,  45  ;  M.  of  3d  V.,
Cataract  City  chap.,  U.  D.
Smith,  Samuel,  Locomotive  Builder,  81  Ellison  St.  J.  W.,  Joppa,  29  ;  Treas.,
Cataract  City  chap.,  U.  D. ;  Morten  com.,  4,  New  York.
FHILLIPSBUBG.
Cooper,  Henry  C,  Physician.     Eastern  Star,  227,  New  York.
Freeman,  Samuel,  Teacher.    J.  W.,  Delaware,  52 ;  Easton  chap.,  173,  Pa. ;
Phila.  coun.,  11,  Pa. ;  St.  John's  com.,  4,  Pa.
Ross,  Lewis  L.,  Teacher.     Delaware,  52.
KAHWAY.
Chapin,  John  R.,  Artist.  P.  M.,  Franklin,  10  ;  Deputy  Grand  Secretary  of
Grand  Lodge ;  P.  M.,  St.  John's,  1.
BINGOES.
Denson,  Charles,  Merchant.     Darcy,  37.
Pittinger,  Jacob  S.  C,  Wheelwright.     W.  M.,  Darcy,  37.
Servis,  Joseph,  Parmer.     Darcy,  37.
Sutphin,  John  J.,  Farmer,  near  Ringoes.     Darcy,  37.
SALEM.
Bates,  Joshua.     W.  M.,  Excelsior,  54 ;  Chap.,  2.
SOUTH  AMBOr.
Capner,  Joseph,  Conductor,  C.  and  A.  R.  R.    Hightstown,  41 ;  Chap.,  5  ;  St.
Bernard's  com.,  2.
Clark,  Charles  S.,  Merchant.     Union,  19.
Dayton,  Richard  B.,  Engineer,  C.  and  A.  R.  R.     Mount  Moriah,  28.
Ent,  Asher,  Engineer.     Hightstown,  41.
Stewart,  James,  Engineer,  0.  and  A.  R.  R.     Hightstown,  41.
Stewart,  Robert,  Telegraph  Operator.     Hightstown,  41.
TITTJSVILLE.
Burroughs,  Benjamin,  Hotel-keeper.     Amwell,  12.
TBENTON.
Bechtel,  Charles,  Printer,  Franklin  Job  Office,  cor.  State  and  Greene  Sts.
M.  C,  Trenton,  5  ;  Three  Times  Three  chap.,  5 ;  Conductor,  Gebal  coun.,  3.
Cane,  Gustavus,  Shaving  and  Hair-cutting  Saloon,  No.  7  East  State  St.  Tren-
ton, 5.
Clapp,  Wm.  R.,  Gentleman.  S.  W.,  Mercer,  50-;  Treas.,  Chap.,  5;  P.  C.  of
W.  Gebal  coun.,  3;  Helena  com.,  3;  Hon.  member  Hiram,  1.

--- Sayfa 284 ---
272  world's  masonic  register.
Cogill,  George  M.,  Dealer  in  Imported  and  Domestic  Cigars,  Chewing  and
Smoking  Tobacco,  and  Agent  for  Masonic  Publications,  No.  64  Warren  St.
Trenton,  5.
Cogill,  J.  H.,  Dealer  in  Hardware  and  Cutlery,  corner  State  and  Greene  Sts.
Trenton,  5.
Corson,  Thos.  J.,  M.D.,  22  Perry  St.  P.  M.,  Trenton,  5  ;  P.  H.  P.  of  Three
Times  Three  chap.,  5 ;  J.  G.  Warden  of  Grand  Lodge ;  M.  B.  G.  H.  P.  of  Grand
Chapter ;  T.  I.  G.  M.,  Gebal  conn.,  3  ;  Helena  com.,  3.
Dolton,  William,  Wholesale  Grocer  and  Commission  Merchant,  Nos.  97  and
99  Warren  St.     J.  D.,  Mercer,  50  ;  Three  Times  Three  chap.,  5.
Holmes,  William,  Brass  Pounder,  56  Center  St.     Trenton,  5.
Hough,  Joseph  H.,  Deputy  Clerk  of  Court  of  Chancery,  76  West  State  St.
Grand  Secretary  of  Grand  Lodge  of  New  Jersey ;  P.  M.,  Mercer,  50 ;  Hiram
chap.,  1 ;  D.  I.  G.  M.,  Gebal  coun.,  3 ;  Hugh  De  Payen's  com.,  1,  Jersey  City.
Johnston,  John  B.,  Clerk  Court  of  Chancery.     Trenton,  5.
Leigh,  Wm.  P.,  Printer,  True  American  Office.     Sec,  Mercer,  50.
McChesny,  Chas.  H,  Merchant  Tailor,  and  Agent  for  Pinkie  &  Lyons's  Sew-
ing Machines,  9  East  State  St.     Mercer,  50.
Nicholson,  William  T.,  Bookbinder  and  Blank  Book  Manufacturer,  22  Bast
State  St.    Mercer,  50.
Raum,  John  O..  Book-keeper  and  Accountant,  85  Broad  St.  Secty.,  Trenton,
5  ;  Secty.,  Chap.,  5 ;  Recorder,  Gebal  coun.,  3.
VIBTCENTOWlir.
Irick,  Wm.  H,  Parmer.    W.  M.,  Central,  44 ;  Chap.,  3.
WABREN'  CO.
Thomas,  Alfred,  Miller.     Warren,  13.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania,  in  January,  1780,  nominated  General
George  Washington  as  General  Grand  Master  of  Masons.  A  silver  medal  was
struck  off  in  commemoration  of  the  nomination.
B.  B.  Prench,  Past  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  District  of
Columbia,  presented  to  B.  B.  Prench  Lodge,  No.  15,  on  the  3d  of  January,  5859,
a  gavel,  made  by  himself.  The  wood  of  the  gavel  is  of  hickory  from  Mount
Vernon,  and  the  handle  of  wood  cut  by  himself  from  Ashland,  thus  uniting  in
that  way  the  names  of  two  men  dear  to  every  American  patriot,  and  very  dear
to  the  Masonic  fraternity,  Washington  and  Clay.
"  In  the  spring  of  1658,  Mordecai  Carapaunall,  Moses  Peckeckoe,  Levi  and
others,  in  all  fifteen  families,  arrived  at  Newport  from  Holland.  They  brought
with  them  the  first  three  degrees  of  Masonry,  and  worked  them  in  the  house  of
Campaunall,  and  continued  to  do  so,  they  and  their  successors,  to  the  year  1742."
(Peterson's  History  of  Rhode  Island,  taken  from  documents  now  in  possession
of  N.  H.  Gould,  Esq.)

--- Sayfa 285 ---
NEW  YORK.
GRAND  LODGE.
The  first  Masonic  authority  in  the  State  of  New  York,  of  which  we  have
any  account,  was  vested  in  George  Harrison,  who,  by  a  commission  bearing
date  the  "Ninth  day  of  June,  1753,  under  the  hand  and  seal  of  John  Proby,
Baron  of  Carysfort,  the  then  Grand  Master  of  England,"  appointing  the  said
George  Harrison  Grand  Master  over  the  then  Province  of  New  York.
Brother  Harrison  established  by  warrant  a  number  of  Lodges  in  this  State
and  elsewhere.  Among  the  Lodges  established  by  him  may  be  mentioned :  St.
John's  Lodge,  No.  1,  at  New  York,  organized  December  7th,  1757  ;  Independ-
ent Boyal  Arch  Lodge,  No.  2,  also  at  New  York,  December  15th,  1760 ;  Union,
(now  Mount  Vernon,)  No.  3,  at  Albany,  February  21st,  1765 ;  St.  Patrick's,
No.  4,  at  Johnstown,  August  23d,  1766;  Solomon's,  No.  6,  Poughkeepsie,
April  18th,  1771.  He  also  established  a  Lodge  at  Detroit,  April  7th,  1764,  and
one  at  Norwalk,  Connecticut,  May  22d,  1765.
Sir  William  Johnson  was  appointed  Provincial  Grand  Master  of  the  "North-
ern District"  of  New  York,  in  the  year  1766  or  1767.  He  organized  two  or
three  Lodges  during  the  time  he  held  that  office.
On  the  5th  of  September,  1781,  a  Provincial  Grand  Warrant  was  issued,  by
the  Duke  of  Athol,  the  then  Grand  Master  of  the  "Ancient  Grand  Lodge  of
England,"  to  Bev.  William  Walter,  as  Provincial  Grand  Master,  John  Stud-
holme  Brownrigg,  Esq.,  as  Senior  Grand  Warden,  and  Bev.  John  Beardsley,  as
Junior  Grand  Warden,  authorizing  said  Brethren  to  open  and  hold  a  Provincial
Grand  Lodge  in  the  Province  of  New  York.
The  first  meeting  of  this  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  was  held  in  the  City  of
New  York,  on  the  5th  of  December,  1782,  at  which  first  meeting  nine  Lodges
were  represented.  Six  of  the  nine  Lodges  were  "  Begimental  Lodges,"  connected
with  the  British  army,  then  occupying  the  City  of  New  York.
At  the  evacuation  of  the  City  of  New  York  by  the  British  army,  in  Novem-
ber, 1783,  the  Begimental  Lodges  left  the  country,  as  also  the  Grand  Master
and  other  Grand  Officers.  New  Grand  Officers  were  elected,  and  soon  that
body  threw  off  its  provincial  character,  and  became  an  independent  Grand
Lodge.
At  first  the  Grand  Lodge  held  monthly  meetings,  then  quarterly  meetings  up
to  the  year  1854,  since  which  time  only  annual  meetings  are  held.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  New  York  has  always  been  the  largest  in  the  United
(273)

--- Sayfa 286 ---
274  world's  masonic  register.
States.  It  has  now  (December,  5860)  455  warranted  Lodges  under  its  jurisdic-
tion, and  10  under  dispensation.  ,
The  Annual  Communications  of  the  Grand  Lodge  are  held  in  the  City  of  New
York,  commencing  on  the  first  Tuesday  in  June.  The  Grand  Lodge  is  com-
posed of  the  Grand  Officers,  the  Masters  and  Wardens  of  its  constituent
Lodges,  and  Past  Grand  Officers  and  Past  Masters  who  were  such  on  the  31st
of  December,  5849.
The  revenue  of  the  Grand  Lodge  is  derived  from  the  following  sources : —
For  Dispensations  for  new  Lodges   $40  00
For  Charters,  in  addition
10  00
For  Dispensations  for  the  three  degrees  at  one  time  .        .    10  00
For  Dispensations  for  degrees  in  less  than  the  regular  time    5  00
For  Grand  Lodge  Diplomas
2  00
For  Grand  Lodge  traveling  certificate  .    *"   .        .        .  50
For  every  Initiation
50
For  every  E.  A.  or  F.  C.  from  without  the  jurisdiction  .  1  00
For  each  Member
50
For  adjoining  fee  of  Master  Masons      ....  50
For  registry  fee  of  every  adjoining  Member  or  B.  A.  made         25
The  returns  of  412  Lodges,  on  the  1st  of  June,  5859,  reported  4910  Initia-
tions, 553  Affiliations,  861  Dimissions,  30  Expulsions,  33  Suspensions,  1123
Stricken  from  the  Poll,  144  Restored,  260  Died.  The  number  of  Masons  in  good
standing  on  the  1st  of  June,  5859,  was  26,977.  Amount  of  receipts  from  Dues,
$15,626  38;  Dispensations  and  Warrants  to  new  Lodges,  $1220  ;  Dispensations
to  confer  Degrees,  $425  ;  Grand  Lodge  Certificates  and  Diplomas,  $688  50.
Total,  $17,959  88.
The  officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  for  the  present  year  are,  viz. : —
John  W.  Simons,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
Finlay  M.  King,  P.  W.  Deputy  Grand  Master.
Clinton  F.  Paige,  R.  W.  Senior  Grand  Warden.
Stephen  H.  Johnson,  R.  W.  Junior  Grand  Warden.
Charles  L.  Church,  R.  W.  Grand  Treasurer.
James  M.  Austin,  M.D.,  R.  W.  Grand  Secretary.
George  E.  Simons,  Assistant  Grand  Secretary.
Rev.  Salem  Town,  LL.D.,  R.  W.  Grand  Chaplain.
Gustavus  A.  Scroggs,  R.  W.  Grand  Marshal.
Robert  G.  Cornell,  R.  W.  Grand  Standard  Bearer.
Frank  M.  Hopkins,  M.D.,  R.  W.  Grand  Sword  Bearer.
James  T.  Couenhoven,   ■.
Amos  H.  Prescott,
Darius  Clark,  \
B.  W.  Grand  Stewards.
Charles  D.  Brown,         J
Henrt  W.  Turner,  R.  W.  Senior  Grand  Deacon.
George  W.  Ray,  R.  W.  Junior  Grand  Deacon.
Oren  Brown,  W.  Grand  Pursuivant.
Sewall  Fisk,  W.  Grand  Tyler.

--- Sayfa 287 ---
NEW  YORK.
2T5
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.
Name.
Time  op  Meeting.
1  St.  John's,  New  York  City.
2  Ind.  Royal  Arch,  New  York  City.
3  Mount  Vernon,     Albany.
4  St.  Patrick's,
5  Masters,
6  St.  George's,
7  Hudson,
8  Holland,
9  Unity,
10  Kingston,
11  Antiquity,
12  Trinity,
13  Apollo,
14  Temple,
15  Western  Star,
Johnstown.
Albany.
Schenectady.
Hudson.
New  York  City.
New  Lebanon.
Kingston.
New  York  City.
New  York  City.
Troy.
Albany.
Bridgewater.
16  Prince  of  Orange,  New  York  City.
17  L'UnionFranfaiseNew  York  City.
19  Fortitude,
20  Abrams,
21  Washington,
22  St.  John's,
23  Adelphi,
26  Albion,
27  Mt.  Moriah,
28  Benevolent,
29  Champion,
30  Godfrey,
31  Mechanic,
32  Warren,
33  Ark,
35  Howard,
38  Columbia,
39  Olive  Branch,
40  Olive  Branch,
41  Sylvan,
44  Evening  Star,
45  Union,
47  Utica,
48  Ark,
49  Watertown,
50  Concord,
51  Fidelity,
53  Brownville,
54  German  Union,
55  Granville,
56  Hohenlinden,
Brooklyn.
New  York  City.
New  York  City.
Greenfield.
New  York  City.
New  York  City.
New  York  City.
New  York  City.
Champion.
New  York  City.
New  York  City.
Pine  Plains.
Geneva.
New  York  City.
Tuthill.
Le  Roy.
Frankfort.
Moravia.
Hornellsville.
Lima.
Utica.
Coxsackie.
Watertown,
New  York  City.
Ithica.
Brownville.
New  York  City.
N.  Granville.
Brooklyn.
2d  &  4th  Thursdays.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Every  Thursday.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
2d  &  4th  Thursdays.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Every  Tuesday.
2d  &  4th  Thursdays.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
Every  Tuesday.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
2d  &  4th  Thursdays.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
Every  Thursday.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
2d  &  4th  Weds.
Monday  of  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
Tues   on  or  b.  f.  m.
Alternate  Weds.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
Alternate  Weds.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
Every  Tuesday.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  &  last  Mondays.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Tuesday  b   f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Thursdays.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
Every  Wednesday.
John  C.  Walker.
E.  P.  Breed.
Thos.  J.  Van  Alslyne.
Saml.  Hopgood.
Frank  Chamberlin.
John  N.  Banker.
Cornelius  Esselstyn.
John  J.  Crane.
Joseph  K.  Royce.
Warren  Chipp.
Vincent  W.  Bale.
Adam  Weber.
Charles  Teson.
Jackson  H.  Chase.
Wm.  Greenman.
Joseph  D.  Evans.
Constant  Claude.
James  P.  Carey.
Leopold  Ansbacher.
Joseph  Richardson.
John  S.  Weed.
Solomon  W.  Asheim.
John  P.  Beaumont.
Wm.  Black.
Thos.  C.  Duxbury.
Alfred  Harris.
Wm.  A.  Godfrey.
Nehemiah  Peck.
J.  W.  Snyder.
Saml.  A.  Anthony.
Chas.  S.  Westoott.
Abm.  D.  Bevier.
John  R.  Anderson.
Judson  Joslin.
Wm.  C.  Cramer.
Miles  W.  Hawley.
Wm.  Harman.
Wm.  C.  Scranton.
John  G.  Bedell.
Stephen  L.  Potter.
Albert  P.  Moriarty.
Hiram  W.  Bishop.
Alanson  Skinner.
Danl.  Lamm.
Chas.  K.  Mann.
Bradley  Parker.

--- Sayfa 288 ---
276
world's  masonic  register.
Lodge.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
58  Phoenix,
62  Manhattan,
63  Morton,
64  La  Fayette,
65  Morning  Star,
66  Richmond,
67  Mariners,
68  Montgomery,
69  Naval,
70  John  Hancock,
73  Lockport,
79  Hamilton,
82  Phoebus,
83  Newark,
84  Artisan,
85  Washington,
86  Pythagoras,
Lansingburg.
New  York  City.
Hempstead.
New  York  City.
Canisteo.
Port  Richmond.
New  York.
New  York.
New  York.
New  York.
Lockport.
Canajoharie.
N.  Berlin  &  Morris.
Newark.
Amsterdam.
Albany.
New  York.
87  Schodac  Union,  Schodac  Centre.
90  Franklin,  Ballston  Spa.
91  King  Sol's  Prim,  Troy.
94  StrictObservance,New  York.
95  Union,
96  Phoenix,
97  Renovation,
98  Columbia,
103  Rising  Sun,
104  Lewis,
105  Hiram,
106  Manitou,
107  North  Star,
108  Milo,
109  Valley,
110  Scipio,
111  St.  Lawrence,
112  Steuben,
113  Seneca,
114  Union,
115  Phoenix,
116  Cohoes,
117  Painted  Post,
118  Addison  Union,
119  Oasis,
120  Hamilton,
121  Glenn's  Falls,
122  Mount  Morris,
123  Dundee,
124  St.  Paul's,
125  Friendship,
Elmira.
Whitehall.
Albion.
Chatham  4  Corners.
Saratoga  Springs.
Howard.
Buffalo.
New  York.
Moira.
Penn  Yan.
Rochester.
Aurora.
Canton.
Bath.
Waterloo.
Ovid.
Dansville.
Cohoes.
Corning.
Addison.
Prattsville.
Hamilton.
Glenn's  Falls.
Mount  Morris.
Dundee.
Auburn.
Hillsdale  Copake.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays,
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
2d  &  4th  Thursdays
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
Monday  b.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Thursdays.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
2d  &  4th  Weds.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
Every  Monday.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Every  Friday.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Monday  evening.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Monday  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Every  Friday.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
1st  &  3d  Mondays
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Friday  b.  f.  m.
.  Saml.  King.
Philip  Botzong.
.  John  Charlie.
Robert  G.  Cornell.
Joshua  C.  Stephens.
Edward  Steers.
Sewall  Fisk.
Thos.  Kivlen.
Jas.  T.  Couenhoven.
E.  M.  Evans.
James  D.  Higgins.
Chas.  H.  Morse.
Cyrel  W.  Beardsley.
Clark  Mason.
Geo.  C.  Bell.
Henry  W.  Scovel.
Chris.  Wittee.
L.  R.  Schermerhorn.
Harvey  N.  Hill.
Geo.  B.  Smith.
Isaiah  Rynders.
Wm.  M.  Gregg.
J.  A.  Watkins.
Geo.  Mather.
John  Cadman.
Geo.  S.  Taber.
C.  Forrester.
James  H.  Barton.
Oscar  Coles.
Rufus  W.  Bowen.
James  Burns.
Roswell  H.  Smith.
John  F.  Ely.
B.  D.  Bragdon.
Edwin  R.  Kasson.
S.  R.  Welles.
J.  F.  Harris.
Henry  Hartman.
Wm.  Lackie.
Chas.  M.  Gamman.
Simon  McCullough.
James  B.  Gregory.
Geo.  F.  Burn.
Joseph  Darby.
Chas.  L.  Bingham.
E.  W.  Rogers.
Thomas  Y.  How.
William  M.  Elton.

--- Sayfa 289 ---
NEW  YORK.
2TT
Time  op  Meeting.
126  Eastern  Light,  Greene.
127  Oswego,  Oswego.
128  Ogdensburg,  Ogdensburg.
129  Sanger,  Waterville.
130  Port  Byron,  Port  Byron.
131  Myrtle,  Havana.
132  NiagaraFrontier,Niagara  Falls.
133  Naples,  Naples.
134  Lowville,  Lowville.
136  Mexico,  Mexico.
137  Anglo-Saxon,  Brooklyn.
138  Otsego,  Cooperstown.
139  Milnor,  Victor.
140  Clinton,  Waterford.
141  Cato,  Cato.
142  Morning  Sun,  Port  Henry.
143  Concordia,  Buffalo.
144  Hiram,  Fulton.
145  Mount  Moriah,  Jamestown.
146  Western  Union,  Belfast.
147  Warren,  Union  Springs.
148  Sullivan,  Chittenango.
149  Au  Sable  River,  Keeseville.
150  Sauquoit,  Sauquoit.
151  Sentinel,  Greenwood.
152  Hanover,  Forestville.
153  Friendship,  Owego.
154  Penfield  Union,  Penfield.
155  Clinton,  Plattsburg.
156  Ocean,  New  York  City.
157  Trumansburg,  Trumansburg.
158  Carthage,  Carthage.
159  Pultneyville,  Pultneyville.
160  Seneca  River,  Baldwinsville.
161  Erie,  Buffalo.
162  Richfield.  Schuyler's  Lake.
163  Yonnondio,  Rochester.
164  Philanthropic,  Camden.
165  Boonville,  Boonville.
166  Forest,  Fredonia.
167  Susquehanna,  Bainbridge.
168  Montour,  Painted  Post.
169  Clinton,  Clinton.
170  Mount  Horeb,  Borodino.
171  Stone  Mills,  Stone  Mills.
172  Chaumont,  Chaumont.
173  Monroe,  Brockport.
174  Theresa,  Theresa.
175  ChenangoValley,Oxford.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.       Robert  P.  Barnard.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.    J.  H.  Warn.
Monday  b.  f.  m.         Charles  S.  Burt.
  E.  A.  Munger.
1st  &  3d  Weds.  James  J.  Owen.
  John  E.  Mulford.
1st  &  3d  Weds.  Samuel  L.  White.
Alternate  Fridays.     Zenas  B.  Wright.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.        Amos  K.  Heddon.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.  S.  A.  Fuller.
Every  Thursday.        James  E.  Jenkins.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.   Delos  L.  Birge.
Alternate  Thursdays.Lindley  W.  Smith.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.  D.M.Vanhbevenburgh.
  James  M.  Allen.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.    J.  C.  Douglas.
Every  Thursday.        Jos.  L.  Haberstro.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.     A.  T.  Loomis.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.    Jos.  S.  Mathews.
  R.  G.  Young.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.       Thos.  J.  Mercereau.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.      Daniel  Gates.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.  Frank  M.  Hopkins.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.     Isaac  T.  Doolittle.
1st  &  3d  Weds.  Ed.  E.  Stewart.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.     Albert  W.  Hull.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.     Charles  W.  Warren.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.    H.  N.  Curtice.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.    Samuel  P.  Bailey.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.    Samuel  T.  Scarlett.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.    Abm.  C.  Updike.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.       N.  D.  Ferguson.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.       Harvey Auchampach.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.    John  H.  Morgan.
Every  Thursday.        Wm.  Gould.
  Geo.  W.  Atkinson.
  William  W.  Bruff.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.    Fred.  M.  Field.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.   Oscar  L.  Wetmore.
Monday  b.  f.  m.         Frank  Burrett.
Wed.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.  Joseph  Kirby.
Monday  aft.  f.  m.       J.  O.  Raymond.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.  H.  M.  Burchard.
Tuesday  bef.  f.  m.      H.  L.  Darling.
Monday  before  f.  m.  A.  Sternberg.
Monday  before  f.  m.  Joshua  Main.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.     Saml.  M.  Olden.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.   J.  D.  Moak.
Monday  before  f.  m.  Wm.  G.  Sands.

--- Sayfa 290 ---
2Y8
world's  masonic  register.
Time  of  Meeting.
176  Montezuma,
177  Binghamton,
178  Atlantic,
179  German  Pilgrim
180  Westchester,
181  Little  Falls,
182  Germania,
183  Farmerville,
184  Turin,
185  Independent,
187  Darcy,
188  Marsh,
189  Cortlandt,
190  Munn,
191  Lebanon,
193  Ulster,
194  Piatt,
195  Excelsior,
196  Solomon's,
197  York,
198  Silentia,
199  Harmony,
200  Sincerity,
201  Joppa,
202  Zschokke,
203  Templar,
204  Palestine,
205  Hyatt,
206  Empire  City,
207  United  States,
208  Cyrus,
209  National,
210  Worth,
211  Pocahontas,
213  Racket  River,
214  Geneseo,
215  Military,
216  Franklin,
217  Gouverneur,
218  Hartland,
219  Summit,
221  Cayuga,
223  Roman,
224  Oriental,
225  Alleghany,
226  Antwerp,
227  Eastern  Star,
228  Enterprise,
229  Pike,
Montezuma.
Binghamton.
New  York.
,New  York.
Sing-Sing.
Little  Falls.
New  York.
Farmerville.
Turin.
New  York.
New  York.
Williamsburg.
Peekskill.
New  York.
New  York.
Saugerties.
New  York.
New  York.
Tarrytown.
New  York.
New  York.
New  York.
Phelps.
Brooklyn.
New  York.
New  York.
New  York.
Williamsburg.
New  York.
New  York.
New  York.
New  York.
New  York.
Seneca  Falls.
Potsdam.
Geneseo.
Manlius.
Westville.
Gouverneur.
Hartland.
Westfield.
Scipio  Centre.
Rome.
Utica.
Friendship.
Antwerp.
New  York.
New  York.
Hume.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays
Every  Wednesday.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
2d  &  last  Thusdays.
2d  &  4th  Weds.
Wed.  on  or  bef.  f.  m
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
Every  Thursday.
Every  Thursday.
Every  Thursday.
Every  Monday.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
Alternate  Weds.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
Every  Thursday.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Every  Friday.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
Tues.  on  orb.  f.  m.
Every  Wednesday.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
Every  Thursday.
Every  Tuesday.
Every  Friday.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Every  Monday.
2d  &  4th  Weds.
Every  Tuesday.
First  Tuesday.
1st  Thursday.
Th.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Monday  before  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Alternate  Mondays.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
Fri.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Every  Wednesday.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Wm.  Bell,  Jr.
Austin  W.  Tyler.
Z.  Dederick.
Aug.  Freutel.
Saml.  C.  Nichols.
Micaiah  Benedict.
Wm.  Burkhardt.
.  Chas.  Kelly.
Cyrus  S.  Hill.
Robt.  L.  Patterson.
R.  G.  Richards.
F.  T.  Clark.
James  W.  Husted.
Chas.  H.  Yallalee.
Saml.  Evens,  Jr.
Wm.  Hanna.
Geo.  Braker.
Geo.  R.  Nichol.
James  W.  Scribner.
Theo.  Miner.
Benj.  T.  Rhodes.
Aug.  Beuermann.
Cal.  H.  Carpenter.
Mordecai  A.  Briggs.
Philip  Merkle.
James  Anderson.
Wm.  Prankard.
H.  W.  Marsh.
Wm.  G.  Ames.
Wm.  H.  Thompson.
H.  B.  C.  Milliken.
James  H.  Lane.
Edward  Taylor.
A.  J.  Goffe.
Wm.  H.  Wallace.
Nelson  B.  Warford.
I.  Remington.
Sewall  Gleason.
C.  A.  Parker.
Wilson  Hoag.
E.  A.  Denison.
Seleh  Cornwell.
R.  E.  Smiley.
David  P.  White.
J.  B.  Harrison.
H.  H.  Miller.
German  Cotton,  p.  t.
A.  J.  McGinnis.
Jonathan  Nye.

--- Sayfa 291 ---
NEW YORK.
279
No.       Lodge,
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
230  Scio,
Wellsville.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays. C.  L.  Farnum.
232  Navigator,
New  York.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays, ,  Geo.  Sohindler.
233  Pacific,
New  York.
Every  Thursday.
Henry  C.  Banks.
234  Rising  Sun,
Adams.
Monday  before  f.  m .  S.  D.  Hungerford.
235  Keystone,
New  York.
Every  Tuesday.
Edmund  B.  Hays.
236  Phillipstown,
Cold  Spring.
Every  Thursday.
Peter  B.  Lawson.
237.  Champlain,
Champlain.
1st  Wednesday.
D.  S.  Holcomb.
238  Orient,
Copenhagen.
Monday  after  f.  m.
G.  A.  Scovell.
339  Cattaraugus,
Little  Valley.
3d  Wednesday.
John  Manley.
240  Washington,
Buffalo.
Every  Thursday.
M.  Pinner.
241  Oscar  Coles,
New  York.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
James  H.  Bunting.
243  Eureka,
New  York.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
John  Carleton.
244  Hope,
New  York.
Every  Tuesday.
J.  J.  Gorman.
245  Polar  Star,
New  York.
Every  Wednesday.
Cor.  Haggerty.
246  Arcana,
New  York.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
J.  C.  B.  Yuille.
247  Tonawanda,
Tonawanda.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays, Franklin  Warren.
248  Palmyra,
Palmyra.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m. Wm.  B.  Crandell.
249  Charter  Oat,
New  York.
Every  Wednesday.
Geo.  Young.
250  John  D.  Willard.New  York.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
G.  T.  Dollinger.
251  Cameron,
Cameron.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
John  Toles.
252  Olean,
Olean.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m. Nathan  P.  Wilcox.
253  Old  Oak,
Millport.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m .  Edwin  W.  Howell.
254  Walworth,
Walworth.
Sat.  on  or  bef.  f.  m. Ammi  C.  Smith.
255  Living  Stone,
C olden.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m .  Ridley  Cole.
256  Fort  Brewerton,  Cicero.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m. Wm.  Caldwell,  Jr.
257  Mount  Neboh,
New  York.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
Elezur  W.  Frank.
258  Macedonia,
Bolivar.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m. James  M.  Curtis.
259  Sisco,
Whallonsburgh .
Wed.  on  or  bef.  f.  m .  John  Burt,  Jr.
260  Mount  Hope,
Fort  Ann.
2d  &  4th  Thursdays .  P.  H.  Lamb.
261  Evans,
Evans.
Alternate  Thursdays s.Levi  Aldrich.
262  Phoenix,
Gowanda.
Monday  before  f.  m .  Henry  S.  Stebbins.
263  Mount  Vernon, North  Java.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
Wm.  W.  Blakely.
264  Baron  Steuben, ,  Stokes.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
Lyman  Sexton.
265  Speedsville,
266  Poughkeepsie,
Caroline.
Josiah  Lawrence.
Poughkeepsie.
Every  Monday.
John  Hamlin.
267  Fort  Edward,
Fort  Edward.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays, ,  Caleb  Wells.
268  Hermann,
New  York.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
John  D.  Meyer.
270  Oneida,
Oneida  Depot.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays. Alonzo  E.  Cherry.
271  Chan.  Walworth,  New  York.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Geo.  E.  Towne.
272  Mystic  Tie,
New  York.
1st,  3d  &  5th  Tues. Malcolm  Campbell.
273  Metropolitan,
New  York.
2d  &  4th  Thursdays .  Danl.  Godwin.
274  Arcturus,
New  York.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
N.  P.  Fitzpatrick.
275  Sylvan  Grove, .  New  York.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays. Joseph  G.  Hill.
276  Mohawk  Valley,  Mohawk.
Every  Friday.
Amos  H.  Presoott.
277  Henry  Clay,
New  York.
Every  Wednesday.
William  Harrigan.
278  Marion,
West  Farms.
Every  Monday.
John  Cornell.
279  King  Solomon, New  York.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
Henry  Schweich.
280  Doric,
New  York.
Every  Thursday.
James  Smiley.
281  Peru,
Peru.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
O.  W.  Smith.

--- Sayfa 292 ---
2S0
world's  masonic  register.
No.          Lodge.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
282  Otego  Union,
Otego.
Friday  b.  f.  m.
Wm.  E.  Arnold.
283  Beacon,
Matteawan.
Every  Tuesday.
James  E.  Shurler.
285  G.  Washington,  New  York.
Every  Friday.
Geo.  C.  A.  Baker.
286  Montauk,
Brooklyn.
Every  Wednesday
Wm.  J.  Scott.
287  Continental,
New  York.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays .    Wm.  C.  Bennett.
288  Brooklyn,
Brooklyn.
Every  Friday.
W.  S.  Whitney.
289  St.  Andrew's,
Hobart.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m .   Bradley  Lyon.
290  Spencer,
Spencer.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  n t.   Isaac  S.  Stanclift.
291  N.  Constellation, Malone.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
Henry  S.  Brewster.
292  Parish,
Black  Rock.
Every  Thursday.
H.  P.  Clinton.
293  Cape  Vincent,
Cape  Vincent.
Monday  b.  f.  m.
Alfred  J.  Smith.
294  Canandaigua,
Canandaigua.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
James  McFeggon.
295  Cataract,
Reynales  Basin.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m
Wm.  G.  Richardson.
296  Clayton,
Clayton.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
Luther  Eddy.
297  Alexandria,
Alexandria.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
Danl.  Roof.
298  Fish  House,
Fish  House.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Geo.  Vanslyke.
299  Keshequa,
Nunda.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
James  Lemon.
300  Garoga,
Rockwood.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
G.  C.  Lee.
301  Irondequoit,
Dunkirk.
Fri.  before  f.  m.
S.  M.  Doyle.
302  Norwich,
Norwich.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
Wm.  A.  Smith.
303  Sylvan,
Sinclearville.
Monday  b.  f.  m.
W.  W.  Henderson.
304  Schiller,
Williamsburg.
Every  Thursday.
Ed.  Roehr.
305  Central  City,
Syracuse.
Every  Tuesday.
Clinton  F.  Paige.
306  Cuba,
Cuba.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
James  L.  Aoomb.
307  Ellicottville,
Ellicottville.
Friday  b.  f.  m.
Wm.  A.  Meloy.
308  Seneca  Lake,
West  Dresden.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Geo.  N.  Brundage.
309  Newburg,
Newburg.
Every  Friday.
Hugh  McCutcheon.
310  Lexington,
Brooklyn.
Every  Monday.
H.  W.  Earn.
311  Mount  Zion,
Troy.
Every  Monday.
John  S.  Perry.
312  Grass  River,
Madrid.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays. Hugh  Smith.
313  Stony  Point,
Haverstraw
Every  Wednesday.
Geo.  S.  Oldfield.
314  Burns,
Burns.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
315  Wawayanda,
Piermont.
Every  Friday.
S.  N.  Wilkins.
316  Atlas,
New  York.
Every  Thursday.
A.  Proudfoot.
317  Neptune,
New  York.
Every  Friday.
G.  E.  Mendum.
318  Joseph  Enos,
Rushford.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Chas.W.Woodworth.
319  Black  Lake,
Edwardsville.
Levi  G.  Miller.
320  Union  Star,
Honeoye  Falls.
1st  &  3d  Monday.
C.  C.  Davison.
321  St.  Nicholas,
New  York.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
Wm.  Adams.
322  Star  Bethlehem ,  Brooklyn.
Every  Friday.
Arthur  Boyce.
323  Amity,
New  York.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
H.  W.  Turner.
324  Freedom,
Unadilla.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m. Jabez  J.  Rogers.
325  Republican,
Parish.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
Abram  David.
326  Salem  Town,
Cayuga.
2d  Tuesday.
John  Morse.
327  Acacia,
New  York.
let  &  3d  Weds.
Joseph  D.  Stewart.
328  Port  Jervis,
Port  Jervis.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
Rufus  Ferguson.
329  Zerubbabel,
New  York.
Every  Wednesday.
M,  Hamburger.
330  New  York,
New  York.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
C.  D.  Brown.
331  Hornellsville,
Hornellsville.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
Ezra  Bowen.

--- Sayfa 293 ---
NEW  YORK.
281
No.
Lodge.
Location.
Time  of  Meetino.
Master.
332  Jefferson,  Watkins.  Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.    I.  S.  Marshall.
333  West  Brook,  Nichols.  Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.    Oliver  A.  Barstow.
334  Cherry  Valley,  Cherry  Valley.    Edwin  Judd.
335  Widow's  Son,  Clermont.  1st  &  3d  Thursdays.  Thos.  Brodhead.
336  Medina,  Medina.    B.C.Blake.
337  Greenbush,  Greenbush.  1st  &  3d  Thurs.  Job  A.  Easterbrook.
338  Putnam,  New  York.  1st  &  3d  Fridays.       Walter  S.  Pinckney.
339  Puritan,  New  York.  Every  Tuesday.  Geo.  H.  Raymond.
340  Modestla,  Buffalo.  1st,  2d  &  3d  Thurs.   John  Greiner.
341  Clyde,  Clyde.  Tuesday  b.  f.  m.        A.  Griswold.
342  Lilly,  Morrisania.  Every  Tuesday.         T.  W.  Gilley.
343  Koundout,  Roundout.    T.Cornell.
345  Lodi,  Lodi.    Saml.  B.  Mundy.
346  Whitesville,  Whitesville.    James  Maston.
347  Hampton,  Westmoreland.    JohnWylie.
348  Adelphic,  New  York.  2d  &  4th  Saturdays.  J.  B.  Yates  Sommers.
349  Peconic,  Greenport.  1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.    0.  J.  Monsell.
350  ChemungValley,Chemung.  1st  &  3d  Fridays.       Andrua  Gere.
351  Springville,  Springville.  Thursday  af.  f.  m.     Joel  Cobleigh.
352  Homer,  Homer.  2d  &  4th  Mondays.    W.  P.  Beck.
353  Woodhull,  Woodhull.  Every  Friday.  C.  M.  Griswold.
354  Progressive,  Williamsburg,  Every  Monday.  Wm.  Danscomb.
355  Jerusalem,  Lansingburg,  1st  &  3d  Mondays.     Alfred  Shumway.
356  U.  Brothers.  New  York.  2d  &  4th  Weds.  J.  P.  Eckoff.
357  Caneadea,  Caneadea.  Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.   Levi  H.  West.
358  Queen  City,  Buffalo.  Every  Wednesday.     C.~G.  Fox.
359  Elm  Creek,  E.  Randolph.  Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.   J.  T.  Fosdick.
360  Nineveh,  Nineveh.  Tuesday  b.  f.  m.         Timothy  Guy.
361  Central,  Brooklyn.  Every  Tuesday.         Lewis  Hurst.
362  Valatie,  Valatie.  1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.    A.  J.  Van  Alen.
363  Evergreen,  Springfield  Centre   S.  R.  Stewart.
364  Horse  Heads,  Horse  Heads.  Alternate  Weds.         C.  Barlow.
365  Goshen,  Goshen.  1st  &  3d  Mondays.     J.  C.  MeConnell.
367  Corner  Stone,  Williamsburg,  Every  Wednesday.     Wm.  H.  Boyd.
368  Croton,  Croton  Falls.  Wed.  on  orb.  f.  m.    Geo.  W.  Gregory.
369  Callimachus,  Phoenix.  1st  &  3d  Weds.  Ira  Betts.
370  Molang,  Crown  Point.  1st  &  3d  Thursdays.  Leland  L.  Doolittle.
371  Sagamore,  New  York.  1st  &  3d  Thursdays.  Luther  B.  Pert.
372  Sandy  Hill,  Sandy  Hill.  1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.    Henry  E.  Dibble.
373  La  Sincerite,  New  York.  1st  &  3d  Weds.  Michael  A.  Pioot.
374  Monumental,  Red  Hook.  1st  &  3d  Weds.  Jacob  W.  Elseffer.
375  Niagara,  Lockport.    Peter  D.  Walters.
376  Ontario,  Wilson.  1st  &  3d  Weds.  Benjamin  Dearborn.
377  Rushville,  Rushville.  Friday  on  orb.  f.  m.    F.  H.  Harwood.
378  Big  Flats,  Big  Flats.    John  D.  Williams.
379  Oakland,  Oakland.  1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.    J.  Burrows.
380  Murray,  Murray.  Every  Wednesday.     Geo.  N.  Bowman.
381  Huguenot,  Tottenville.    Abm.  H.  Wood.

--- Sayfa 294 ---
282
world's  masonic  register.-
Location.  Tims  of  Meeting.  Master.
Brooklyn.  2d  &  4th  Fridays.      Wm.  W.  Carman.
Fort  Covington.    Seth  Blanchard.
Cherry  Creek.  Friday  before  f.  m.    Alvah  Billings.
Weedsport.    George  Coon,  Jr.
Jordan.    J.  G.  Webster.
La  Fraternidad,  New  York.  1st  &  3d  Saturdays.  Miquel  Castellanos.
Centre  Lisle.    P.  Edminister.
Middletown.  2d  &  last  Weds.  Smith  W.  Reed.
Salem.  Every  Monday.  James  Gibson.
Sodus.    Asahel  Yale.
Waddington.  1st  &  3d  Fridays.       John  Peacock.
Richmondville.  1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.    S.  M.  Van  Alstyne.
Parishville.  Day  of  or  bef.  f.  m.  H.  M.  Sprague.
Deposit.  Every  Monday.  Chas.  Knapp.
Elmira.  1st  &  3d  Thursdays.  Jesse  L.  Cooley.
Northumberland.       Wednesday  b.  f.  m.  N.  Morey.
Maine.    N.  W.  Eastman.
400  "Van  Rensselaer,  Hoosick  Falls.    J.  L.  F.  Crosby.
Port  Jefferson.  1  st  Thursday.  Wm.  T.  Hulse.
New  York.  2d  &  4th  Mondays.    Wm.  M.  Gambling.
Brooklyn.  Every  Friday.  Wm.  Tracy.
Perry.    C.  W.  Hendee.
Norfolk.    J.  R.  Brinckerhoff.
Lyons.    Joseph  Welling.
Waverly.  lst&  3dWednesd'ys.  P.  Lowrey.
New  York.  2d  &  4th  Weds.  Joseph  S.  Cohen.
409  Commonwealth,  Brooklyn.  Every  Tuesday.  James  M.  Fuller.
410  La  Clemente  Am.  Cos.  New  York.  2d  &  4th  Weds.  A.  Letellier.
Candour  Centre.  1st  &  3d  Wednesd'ys.  E.  C.  Cowell.
Middletown.  1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.    Joshua  Draper.
Varysburg.  Thursday  b.  f.  m.       G.  C.  Parker.
Constantia.  1st  &  3d  Mondays.     Abm.  Conterman.
Pulaski.  1st  &  3d  Wednesd'ys.  Don.  A.  King.
Ontario.  Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.       Isaac  Z.  Hodges.
Albany.  1st  &  3d  Thursdays.  S.  H.  Wetherwax.
New  York.  Every  Monday.  David  Cochrane.
China.  Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.       Reuben  Ball.
New  London.    John  D.  Oxner.
Genoa.  Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.  James  M.  White.
Oswego.  Every  Friday.  F.  P.  Kilborn.
Herkimer.  1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.    Ezra  Graves.
Rouse's  Point.  1st  &  3d  Thursdays.   P.  R.  Wales.
Warrensburg.  1st  &  3d  Saturdays.  Myron  N.  Dickinson.
Pittsford.  Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.    E.  H.  Wolcott.
Durham.    J.  W.  Hoffman.
Colton.    Wm.  N.  Jacques.
Gloversville.  Tuesday  evening.       Geo.  J.  Newton.
Brooklyn.  Every  Thursday.        John  L.  Nostrand.
Auburn.    Horatio  Robinson.Jr.
382  Long  Island,
383  Aurora,
384  Cherry  Creek,
385  Weedsport,
386  Jordan,
387
388  Centre  Lisle,
389  Margaretville,
391  Salem,
392  Sodus,
393  Waddington,
394  Richmondville,
395  Amber,
396  Deposit,
397  Ivy,
398  Home,
399  Maine,
400  "Van  Rei
401  Suffolk,
402  Crescent,
403  Greenpoint,
404  Constellation,
405  Norfolk,
406  Humanity,
407  Waverly,
408  City,
411  Candour,
412  Hoffman,
413  West  Star,
414  Scriba,
415  Pulaski,
416  Wayne,
417  Wadsworth,
418  Mosaic,
419  Arcade,
420  New  London,
421  Genoa,
422  Frontier  City,
423  Herkimer,
424  Lake,
425  Warrensburg,
426  Northfield,
427  Cascade,
428  High  Falls,
429  Gloversville,
430  Star  of  Hope,
431  Auburn,

--- Sayfa 295 ---
NEW   TOEK.
233
No.     Lodge.  Location.  Time  of  Meeting.  Master.
432  Rhinebeck,  Rhinebeck.  Thursday  evening.     Homer  Gray.
433  Fort  Plain,  Fort  Plain.  2d  &  4th  Saturdays.  Peter  Snyder.
434  Hiawatha,  Mount  Vernon.  2d  &  4th  Weds.  Wm.  E.  Palmer.
435  Otseningo,  Binghamton.  Every  Thursday.        Henry  C.  Preston.
436  Schroon  Lake,  Sehroon  Lake.         '  2d  &  4th  Weds.  H.  S.  Potter.
437  Wamponamon,  Sag  Harbor.    James  E.  Smith.
438  Marathon,  Marathon.  1st  &  3d  Wednesd'ys.  Eli  B.  Husted.
439  Delhi,  Delhi.  Every  Thursday.        Philo  B.  Mervin.
440  Vienna,  Vienna.    David  Tremain.
441  L.  Ancient  Landmarks,  Buffalo.    Wm.  Hersee.
442  Windsor,  Windsor.  1st  &  3d  Fridays.       W.  Dusenbury.
444  Sherburne,  Sherburne.    James  M.  Colwell.
445  Cassia,  Brooklyn,  E.  D.  Every  Wednesday.     Wm.  H.  Beese.
446  Oltmans,  Brooklyn,  E.  D.  1st  &  3d  Fridays.        Henry  Oltmans.
447  Franklin,  New  York.  1st  &  3d  Mondays.     David  A.  D'Ancona.
448  Huguenot,  New  Bochelle.    Pelham  L.  MoClelan.
449  Hiram,  New  York.  2d  &  4th  Fridays.      Geo.  W.  Peters.
450  Rising  Star,  Yonkers.  2d  &  4th  Weds.  Leonard  M.  Clark.
451  Delta,  Brooklyn.  Every  Friday.  R.  W.  Doekson.
452  Ancient  City,  Albany.  1st  &  3d  Wednesd'ys.  John  D.  Williamson.
453  Clinton,  New  York.  1st  &  3d  Thursdays.  Jonathan  Woods.
454  Kane,  New  York.  Every  Tuesday.  Thomas  S.  Sommers.
455  Newport,  Newport.  1st  &  3d  Saturdays.  Geo.  W.  Skinner.
456  Senate,  Glenn's  Falls.  Every  Monday.  Austin  W.  Holden.
457  Harlem,  Harlem.  Every  Thursday.        T.  F.  Compton.
458  Shekomeko,  Mabbettsville.  1st  &  3d  Saturdays.  John  S.  Parker.
459  Urbana,  Urbana.  Monday  on  orb.  f.m.  Danl.  E.  Loveridge.
460  Monticello,  Monticello.  2d  &  4th  Weds.  A.  J.  Baldwin.
461  Yew  Tree,  Brooklyn,  E.  D.  Every  Tuesday.  Wm.  J.  Horsford.
462  Attica,  Attica.  2d  &  3d  Wednesd'ys.  F.  C.  Cunningham.
463  Weston,  Weston.    Wm.  Gulick.
464  Downsville,  Colchester.  Every  Saturday.        Wm.  G.  White.
465  Wilton,  Wilton.    Ed.  B.  Goodspeed.
466  Oneonta,  Oneonta.    John  F.  Perkins.
467  Greenwich,  New  York.  Every  Saturday.        John  A.  Lefferts.
468  Catskill,  Catskill.    John  H.  Bagley,  Jr.
470  Cortlandville,  Cortland.  Every  Monday.  Joseph  Reynolds.
471  Tompkins,  Southfield.    Isaac  Lea.
472  Dryden,  Dryden.  Every  Wednesday.      M.Van  Valkenburgh.
473  White  Plains,  White  Plains.  Every  Wednesday.     John  P.  Jenkins.
474  Belmont,  Belmont.  Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.    E.  W.  Chamberlain.
475  Batavia,  Batavia.    H.M.Warren.
476  Fairport,  Fairport.  Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.      Joshua  C.  Eaton.
477  Wildwood,  Edwards.  Friday  before  f.  m.     Amos  Newton.
478  Dansville,  Dansvilie.  1st  &  3d  Mondays.     Chas.  A.  Ackley.
479  Etolian,  Spencerport.    W.  C.  Slayton.
480  Webotuck,  North  East.    Lucius  D.  Wood.
481  Cambridge  Valley,  Cambridge.  Every  Monday.  Hiram  House.
482  Richfield  Springs,  Richfield  Springs   James  Hyde.
19

--- Sayfa 296 ---
284
world's  masonic  register.
No.  Lodge.  Location.  Time  of  Meetino.  Master.
483  Zeredatha,  Brooklyn.  Every  Wednesday.     Benj.  Price.
484  Columbia,  New  York.  Every  Tuesday.  Alexander  Trotter.
485  Stella,  Brooklyn.    Chas  W.  Willetts.
486  Ionic,  New  York.  2d  &  4th  Thursdays.  Thomas  M.  Woods.
487  Tecumseh,  New  York.  Every  Thursday.        Chas.  W.  Atwood.
488  Corinthian,  New  York.  Every  Thursday.        Edward  Dalton.
489  Manahatta,  New  York.  Every  Wednesday.     Henry  W.  Hibberd.
490  Pyramid,  New  York.  Every  Monday.  Jacob  R.  Brepee.
491  Scoharie  Valley,  Scoharie.    Hadley  Snyder.
492  Wyoming,  Westchester.    Wm.  J.  McDermott.
493  South  Side,  Patchogue.    Wm.  S.Preston.
494  Jephtha,  Huntington.    Wm.  H.  King.
495  Houndsfield,  Sackett's  Harbor   Stevens  W.  Flower.
496  Groton,  Groton.    Dexter  Allen.
497  Glen  Dale,  Pottersville.    Simeon  R.  Codman.
498  De  Molay,  Buffalo.    Jonathan  T.  Wilber.
499  Deer  River,  Nicholville.    J.F.Sanders.
500  Hermon,  Hermon.    A.  P.  Sherwin.
501  Syracuse,  Syracuse.  Every  Wednesday.      Lewis  E.  Joy.
U.  D.  Louisville,  Louisville.    James  M.  Miller.
U.  D.  Old  Ti,  Ticonderoga.
  John  Smith.
U.D.Montgomery,  Stillwater.    Wm.  J.  Heath.
U.D.Baltic,  Brooklyn.    Wm.  J.  Huff.
U.  D.  Canastota,  Canastota.    Harrison  Frank.
U.D.Park,  New  York.    John  G.  Fielding.
U.  D.  NorthernLight.West  Chazy.    Joel  W.  Eaton.
U.D.Rodman,  Rodman.    Herman  Strong.
U.  D.  Genesee  Falls,  Rochester.    Wm.  E.  Lathrop.
U.  D.  Herschel,  Hartford.    Wm.  Cono-don.
GRAND  CHAPTER.
Organized  5798.
The  Annual  Convocations  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  New  York  are  held  in
the  City  of  Albany  on  the  first  Tuesday  of  February.  This  Grand  Chapter  is
subordinate  to  the  General  Grand  Chapter.  It  has  89  subordinate  Chapters,
haying  4152  members.  There  were  587  Exaltations  reported  at  the  Annual
Convocation  5860.     Amount  of  dues  paid  Grand  Chapter,  $3104  72.
SUBORDINATE  CHAPTERS.
Time  of  Meeting.
1st  and  3d  Thursdays
2d  and  4th  Mondays.
2d  and  4th  Tuesdays.
No.
Name.
Location.
1 Ancient,
New  York.
2 Phoenix,
New  York.
5 Temple,
Albany.
6 Hudson,
Hudson.
8 Jerusalem,
New  York.

--- Sayfa 297 ---
NEW   YORK.
285
No.
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
13  Lebanon,
22  Warren,
23  Warren,
24  St.  Lawrence,
26  Otsego,
28  N.  Constellation,
30  John  Baptist,
84  David's,
35  Western  Star,
36  Geneva,
39  Plattsburg,
42  Elmira,
47  New  Jerusalem,
48  Apollo,
50  Cyrus,
53  Hiram  Union,
57  Oneida,
58  Eagle,
69  Watertown,
62  Hamilton,
63  Ogdensburgh,
64  Aurora,
67  Western  Sun,
68  Sackett's  Harbor.
70  Syracuse,
71  Buffalo,
72  Manlius,
75  Mount  Horeb,
76  Fredonia,
77  Fidelity,
78  Johnstown,
79  Palmyra  Eagle,
88  Ames,
91  Dansville,
92  Ovid,
95  Bath,
96  Cape  Vincent,
100  Penn  Tan,
101  Steuben,
103  St.  John's,
106  Greene,
107  Morning  Star,
109  Nassau,
116  Sacandaga,
117  Newark,
131  Rising  Sun,
132  St.  Lawrence,
133  Phoenix,
134  Champlain,
N.  Lebanon.
Waterville.
Ballston  Spa.
Potsdam.
Cooperstown.
Malone.
Moravia.
Auburn.
Batavia.
Geneva.
Plattsburg.
Elmira.
Owego.
Xroy.
Hamilton.
Canajoharie.
Utica.
Ithaca.
Watertown.
Rochester.
Ogdensburgh.
Aurora.
Jamestown.
Sackett's  Harbor.
Syracuse.
Buffalo.
Manlius.
Kingston.
Fredonia.
Trumansburg.
Johnstown.
Palmyra.
Lockport.
Dansville.
Ovid.
Bath.
Cape  Vincent.
Penn  Tan.
Hornellsville.
Greenfield.
Greene.
Lima.
Brooklyn.
Northampton.
Newark.
Saratoga  Springs.
Canton.
Lansingburg.
Whitehall.
Wednesday  after  full  moon.
2d  and  4th  Thursdays.
1st  Wednesday.
Thursday  after  full  moon.
2d  and  4th  Tuesdays.
1st  and  3d  Thursdays.
Wednesday  after  f.  m.  and  c.
2d  and  4th  Mondays.
Tuesday  after  full  moon.
1st  and  3d  Mondays.
1st  and  3d  Fridays.
2d  and  4th  Tuesdays.
Wednesday  before  f.  m.
Alternate  Thursdays.
Thursday  f.  m.  w.  and  c.
2d  Monday  before  f.  m.
Every  Wednesday.
Monday  after  f.  m.  and  c.
Thursday  on  or  before  f.  m.
Friday  on  or  before  f.  m.
Tuesday  before  full  moon.
Monday  after  full  moon.
Tuesday  before  full  moon.
Wednesday  before  f.  m.
Wednesday  before  f.  m.
Wednesday  full  moon  w.
2d  and  4th  Thursdays.
1st  Monday.

--- Sayfa 298 ---
286
world's  masonic  register.
No.
Name.
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
135  Mexico,
136  Forrestville,
137  Mount  Morris,
138  Orient,
139  Binghamton,
140  Metropolitan,
141  Zetland,
142  De  Witt  Clinton,
143  Wellsville,
144  Darius,
145  Black  River,
146  Addison,
147  Zerubbabel,
148  Brooklyn,
149  Theresa,
160  Olean,
151  Harmony,
152  Genesee  River,
153  Fort  Stanwix,
154  Glenn's  Falls,
155  Nunda,
156  Morris,
157  Mohawk,
158  Adelphic,
159  Corinthian,
160  Amity,
161  Brewer,
162  Vallonia,
163  Keystone,
164  Excelsior,
165  Crocker,
166  Chamberlain,
167  Fulton,
168  Cohoes,
169  Waterford,
Mexico.
Gowanda.
Mount  Morris.
Brooklyn.
Binghamton.
New  York.
New  York.
Williamsburg.
Wellsville.
Camden.
Boonville.
Addison.
New  York.
Brooklyn.
Theresa.
Olean.
Norwich.
Belfast.
Rome.
Glenn's  Falls.
Nunda.
Port  Byron.
Schenectady.
New  York.
New  York.
New  York.
Little  Falls.
Colesville.
Buffalo.
Canandaigua.
Oswego.
little  Valley.
Fulton.
Cohoes.
Waterford.
Wednesday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
4th  Tuesday  before  f.  m.
1st  and  3d  Fridays.
1st  and  3d  Tuesdays.
1st  and  3d  Thursdays.
2d  and  4th  Fridays.
Wednesday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  and  3d  Tuesdays.
1st  and  3d  Mondays.
1st  and  3d  Wednesdays.
Wednesday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Monday  on  or  before  f.  m.
■1st  &  3d  Mons.  af.  1st  Wed.
2d  and  4th  Wednesdays.
1st  and  3d  Thursdays.
2d  and  4th  Wednesdays.
2d  and  4th  Thursdays.
2d  and  4th  Tuesdays.
Every  Thursday.
2d  and  4th  Wednesdays.
GRAND  COUNCIL.
Organized  5807.
This  Grand  Council,  by  resolution  at  each  Annual  Assembly,  fixes  "the  time
and  place  for  holding  the  next  Annual  Assembly."  This  Grand  Council  has
11  subordinate  Councils  under  its  jurisdiction.  The  returns  of  June,  5860,  show
the  following :  Number  of  members,  412 ;  Received  and  Greeted  during  the
year,  193;  Affiliated,  4;  Dimitted,  53;  Stricken  from  the  Roll,  7;  Died,  1.
Amount  of  receipts,  $272  38.

--- Sayfa 299 ---
NEW  YORK.
287
SUBORDINATE  COUNCILS.
No.         Name.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
1     Columbia,
New  York.
4    Brooklyn,
Brooklyn.
7    Adelphic,
New  York.
1st  &  3d  Wednesdays.
8    Eureka,
Greene.
10    Gras3  Valley,
Grass  Valley,  California.
12    Oneida,
Borne.
13    Central  City,
Syracuse.
14    Bloss,
Troy.
15    Bruce,
Lockport.
16    Southern  Tier,
Blmira.
17    Buffalo,
Buffalo.
GRAND  COMMANDERY.
Organized  June  18,  1814.
The  Annual  Conclaves  of  this  Grand  Commandery  are  held  at  such  time  and
place  as'  is  previously  designated.  Its  next  Annual  Conclave  will  be  held  in
Binghamton,  on  September  10th,  1861.  It  has  25  subordinate  Commanderies,
having  1373  members.    Amount  of  receipts,  $1340  27.
SUBORDINATE  COMMANDERIES.
No.
1
2
Name.
Columbian,
Temple,
3  Utica,
4  Morton,
7  La  Fayette,
10  Genesee,
11  Watertown,
12  Monroe,
14  Clinton,
15  Apollo,
16  Salem  Town,
17  Jerusalem,
18  Palestine,
19  St.  Omer's,
20  Lake  Erie,
21  Malta,
22  DeMolay,
23  Coeur  de  Lion,
24  St.  John's,
25  Central  City,
Location.
New  York.
Albany.
Utica.
New  York.
Hudson.
Lockport.
Watertown.
Rochester.
Brooklyn.
Troy.
Auburn.
Penn  Yan.
New  York.
Elmira.
Buffalo.
Binghamton.
Hornellsville.
New  York.
Wellsville.
Syracuse.
Time  op  Meeting.
1st  Wednesday.
1st  and  3d  Fridays.
1st  and  3d  Fridays.
2d  and  4th  Fridays.
1st  Friday.
Friday  full  moon  week.
2d  and  4th  Fridays.
2d  Friday.
1st  and  3d  Mondays.
4th  Friday.
1st  and  3d  Mondays.
3d  Friday.
3d  Wednesday.
3d  Friday,  3  p.m.

--- Sayfa 300 ---
288
world's  masonic  register.
No.
Name.
Location.
Time  of  Meetiwo.
26
Little  Falls,
Little  Falls.
2d  and  4th  Fridays.
27
De  Witt  Clinton,
Williamsburg.
4th  Monday.
28
St.  Lawrence,
Canton.
1st  and  3d  Fridays.
29
Geneva,
Geneva.
30
Hugh  De  Payen's,
Buffalo.
SUBSCRIBERS'   NAMES.
ADDISON,  Steuben  County.
Angle,  Wm.  W.,  Dry  Goods,  Groceries,  and  Beady-made  Clothing.  J.  D.,
Addison  Union,  118  ;  Addison  chap.,  146.
Blakslee,  B.,  M.D.  and  Druggist.  Initiated  a.l.  5817  ;  P.  M.,  Addison  Union,
118  ;  H.  P.,  Addison  chap.,  146 ;  Order  of  High  Priesthood.
Curtiss,  Josiah,  Flouring,  Plaster,  and  Saw  Mills,  and  Dealer  in  Grain  and
Lumber.     P.  M.,  Addison  Union,  118  ;  R.  A.  0.,  Addison  chap.,  146.
Dunn,  Wm.  H.,  Cooper.    Tyler,  Addison  Union,  118.
Grenell,  Z.,  Architect  and  Builder.     S.  W.,  Addison  Union,  118.
Manley,  George,  Fanner  and  Lumberman.    Addison  Union,  118.
McCullough,  Simon,  River  Pilot  and  Lumber  Jobber.  W.  M.,  Addison
Union,  118.
McKay,  James  S.,  Merchant  Miller,  and  Deputy  U.  S.  Marshal.  Treasurer,
Addison  Union,  118  ;  Treasurer,  Addison  chap.,  146 ;  R.  and  S.  Master ;  St.
Omer's  com.,  19.
Mitchell,  John,  M.D.  Secretary,  Addison  Union,  118 ;  Secretary,  Addison,
chap.,  146.
Montgomery,  Charles  E.,  Hotel  Clerk  and  Farmer.     Addison  Union,  118.
Shepard,  J.  K.,  Refreshment  Saloon.  P.  S.  W.,  Addison  Union,  118 ;  P.
C.  H.,  Addison  chap.,  146.
Stevens,  Miles,  Druggist.  P.  J.  W.,  Addison  Union,  118 ;  P.  H.  P.,  Addison
chap.,  146  ;  Order  of  High  Priesthood.
ALBANY.
Quin,  Michael,  Blacksmith,  No.  16  Rose  St.  P.  M.,  "Washington,  85 ;  P.  K.,
Temple  chap.,  5.
Scovel,  Henry  W.,  Manufacturer,  524  Broadway,    W.  M.,  Washington,  85.
Washington  Lodge,  No.  85.  Dispensation  granted  February,  15th,  5841 ;
Chartered  June  6th,  5841 ;  meetings  second  and  fourth  Thursdays.
ALBION,  Orleans  County.
Adler,  Simon,  Merchant  Tailor.    Renovation,  97.
Burrows,  Geo.  L.,  Bank  Teller.     Treasurer,  Renovation,  97.
Hutchinson,  George  S.,  Groceries  and  Provisions.     S.  W.,  Renovation,  97.
Mathinson,  Walker,  Produce  and  Provisions.     Renovation,  97.
Prentis,  0.,  M.D.    Rose,  304,  Ohio.

--- Sayfa 301 ---
n       •  NEW  YORK.  289
Preston,  Hiram  W.,  Jeweler  and  Watch-maker.    Eenovation,  97  ;  Huron
chap.,  7,  Ohio.
Thompson,  S.  D.,  Farmer  and  Operative  Mason.    Renovation,  97.
BATH,  Steuben  County.
Barron,  Chas.  H.,  Hardware  Dealer.    Steuben,  112 ;  Bath  chap.,  95.
Beekman,  A.,  Manufacturer  Sashes,  Blinds,  and  Doors,  and  General  Dealer  in
House  Trimmings.     S.  W.,  Steuben,  112  ;  P.  S.,  Bath  chap.,  95.
Campbell,  Chas.  W.,  Attorney  at  Law.  P.  M.,  Steuben,  112  ;  Scribe,  Bath
chap.,  95.
Champlin,  Addison  P.,  Salesman  for  H.  W.  Perrine.  J.  W.,  Steuben,  112 ;
B.  A.  C.  Bath  chap.,  95.
De  Wolf,  T.  S.,  Foreman  Courier  Office.     Steuben,  112.
Faucett,  Henry,  Clerk  in  County  Clerk's  Office.     Steuben,  112.
Kasson,  Edwin  R.,  Under  Sheriff.     W.  M.,  Steuben,  112  ;  Bath  chap.,  95.
Vanderhorn,  J.,  Postmaster  and  Hatter.  Initiated  a.l.  5825  ;  P.  M.,  Steuben,
112  ;  Steuben  chap.,  101.
BINGHAMTCOT,  Broome  County.
Abbott,  L.  S.,  Leather  Manufacturer,  Boot  and  Shoe  Findings.  S.  W.,
Otseningo,  435 ;  Binghamton  chap.,  139.
Brown,  Chas.  M.,  Proprietor  Lewis  House,  near  the  R.  R.  Depot.  Secretary,
Otseningo,  435.
Cary,  James  S.,  Book-keeper  in  Broome  Co.  Bank ;  Fire,  Life,  and  Insurance
Agent.    J.  W.,  Binghamton,  177  ;  Past  P.  S.,  Binghamton  chap.,  139.
Cook,  James  E.,  Mercantile  Salesman.  S.  D.,  Otseningo,  435  ;  Binghamton
chap.,  139.
Curran,  R.  H.,  General  Agent.     Binghamton,  177.
De  Witt,  Abraham,  Grocer.     Otseningo,  435.
Grant,  D.  R.,  Baker  and  Confectioner.     Otseningo,  435.
Hungerford,  John,  Dealer  in  Dry  Goods,  Carpets,  Oil  Cloths,  etc,  30  Court
St.     Otseningo,  435.
Lewis,  E.  H.,  Proprietor  American  House.     Otseningo,  435.
Masterson,  John  H,  Operative  Mason  and  Master  Builder.  Newark,  7,
Newark,  N.  J.
Newman,  Myron,  Clothing  Merchant.     J.  W.,  Otseningo,  435.
Preston,  H.  Clay,  Bookseller  and  Stationer.  W.  M.,  Otseningo,  435  ;  Scribe,
Binghamton  chap.,  139 ;  Recorder,  Malta  com.,  21.
Roberts,  Wm.,  Manufacturer  Stoneware.  Senior  M.  of  Ceremonies,  Otse-
ningo, 435.
Rogers,  Hiram  C,  Teller  Bank  of  Binghamton.  S.  W.,  Binghamton,  177  ;
P.  S.,  Binghamton  chap.,  139  ;  J.  W.,  Malta  com.,  21.
Sherwood,  Benj.,  Attorney  at  Law.     Otseningo,  435.
Tyler,  A.  W.,  Manufacturer  and  Dealer  in  Rough  and  Planed  Lumber  of  all
kinds.  W.  M.,  Binghamton,  177  ;  King,  Binghamton  chap.,  1 39 ;  Royal  and
Select  Master ;  P.  S.  B.,  Malta  com.,  21.
Webster,  C.  H.,  Druggist.  P.  M.,  Otseningo,  435  ;  P.  H.  P.,  Binghamton
chap.,  139;  Royal  and  Select  Master;  P.  E.  C,  Malta  com.,  21 ;  P.  G.  J.  W.,

--- Sayfa 302 ---
290  world's  masonic  register.
Provincial  Grand  Lodge,  Canada  ;  P.  M.,  The  Barton,  6,  Canada ;  1st  W.  M.,
Wellington,  33,  Guelph,  C.  W. ;  Junior  G.  Warden  of  G.  Com.,  N.  Y. ;  Dist.
Deputy  G.  M.  12th  Dist,  G.  L.,  N.  Y.
Weed,  J.  Lewis,  R.  R.  Conductor.  Otseningo,  435 ;  Binghamton  chap.,  139 ;
Malta  com.,  21.
Williams,  E.  J.,  U.  S.  Express  Agent.    Irondequoit,  301.
BAINBHIDGE,  Chemung  County.
Humphrey,  Samuel,  Agriculturalist.     S.  W.,  Susquehanna,  167.
BAEEEfGTOlf,  Yates  County.
Hawse,  Wm.,  Agriculturalist.    Dundee,  123  ;  Penn  Yan  chap.,  100.
Lantz,  Robert,  Agriculturalist.     Dundee,  123.
Shaw,  John  H.,  M.D.     Dundee,  123 ;  Penn  Yan  chap.,  100.
Townsend,  Harvey  N.,  Agriculturalist.     Dundee,  123  ;  Penn  Yan  chap.,  100 ;
Jerusalem  com.,  17.
BETHANY.
Page,  F.  R.,  Bookseller.    Fisher's,  212.
BKOCKBOKT,  Monroe  County.
Bowman,  Wm.  H.,  Attorney  at  Law.    Monroe,  173.
Davis,  Jay  G.,  Canal  Collector  and  Farmer.     P.  J.  W.,  Monroe,  173.
Greenough,  Ezra,  Carriage  Manufacturer.  S.  W.  Monroe,  173 ;  Hamilton
chap.,  62  ;  Monroe  com.,  12.
Hill,  A.  D.,  Planing  and  Matching  Mill.    P.  Sec,  Monroe,  173.
Holmes,  Daniel,  Attorney  and  Justice  of  Peace.  P.  M.,  Monroe,  173;
Hamilton  chap.,  62  ;  Monroe  com.,  12.
Kelly,  H.  H.,  Supt.  Brockport  Gas  Co.  P.  S.  W.,  Monroe,  173 ;  Hamilton
chap.,  62  ;  Monroe  com.,  12.
Olden,  Samuel  M.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.     W.  M.,  Monroe,  173.
Osborn,  S.,  Carriage  Manufacturer.     S.  D.,  Monroe,  173.
BUFFALO,  Erie  County.
Brown,  Charles,  Proprietor  Brown's  Hotel,  corner  Seneca  and  Michigan  Sts.
Erie,  161.
BUKDETT,  Schuyler  County.
Hager,  Chester  M.,  Agriculturalist.    Jefferson,  332.
CANANDAIG-TJA,  Ontario  County.
Cheney,  W.  Fitch,  Druggist  and  Chemist.     Canandaigua,  294.
Chesebro,  N.  G.,  retired  from  business.  Initiated  in  Ontario  Masters  Lodge,
23,  a.a..  5813,  now  a  member  of  Canandaigua,  294;  Excelsior  chap.,  164 ;  Monroe,
com.,  12  ;  Pt.  M.  and  P.  H.  P.
Fox,  G.  R.,  American  Express  Agent.  S.  W.,  Canandaigua,  294 ;  C.  H.,
Excelsior  chap.,  164.
Francis,  J.  B.,  Cabinet  Manufacturer  and  Undertaker.  Canandaigua,  294 ;
Excelsior  chap.,  164.
Gunn,  W.  P.,  Hotel-keeper  and  Farmer.     Canandaigua,  294.

--- Sayfa 303 ---
NEW  YORK.  291
Lapham,  Wm.  G.,  Fanner  and  Civil  Engineer.  Canandaigua,  294  ;  Excelsior
chap.,  164;  Monroe  com.,  12.
Mason  J.  Harvey,  Leather  Dealer  and  Manufacturer.  P.  M.  and  Treas.,
Canandaigua,  294 ;  Treas.,  Excelsior  chap.,  164.
Mattison,  J.  J.,  Proprietor  and  Publisher  "  Ontario  Messenger."  P.  S.  W.,
Canandaigua,  294 ;  P.  King,  Excelsior  chap.,  164  ;  Monroe  com.,  12.
McFeggan,  James,  Agent  N.  Y.  C.  E.  B.  W.  M.,  Canandaigua,  294 ;  P.  S.,
Excelsior  chap.,  164.
Pratt,  J.  E.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.  P.  M.,  Canandaigua,  294;  P.  H.  P.,
Excelsior  chap.,  164.
Bemington,  C,  Druggist.     Sec,  Canandaigua,  294.
Salisbury,  S.  W.,  Attorney  at  Law.  First  W.  M.,  Canandaigua,  294 ;  King,
Excelsior  chap.,  164 ;  Monroe  com.,  12.
Stephenson,  J.,  "Watchmaker  and  Jeweler.  P.  S.  W.,  Canandaigua,  294;
Excelsior  chap.,  164;  Southern  Tier  coun.,  16  ;  Monroe  com.,  12.
Sterling,  H.  F.,  Marble  Manufacturer.     Canandaigua,  294.
Sterling,  S.  L.,  Marble  Manufacturer.  J.  W.,  Canandaigua,  294 ;  E.  A.  C,
Excelsior  chap.,  164.
CASSADAGA,  Chautauque  County.
Phillips,  T.  D.,  Dentist.     Forest,  166 ;  Fredonia  chap.,  76.
CAYUGA,  Cayuga  County.
Hungerford,  Fayette,  Depot  Clerk  N.  Y.  C.  E.  E.     Salem  Town,  326.
Lyon,  F.  H.,  Storage.  Forwarding,  E.  E.  and  Express  Agent,  Hotel  and
Eating  Saloon.     Salem  Town,  326.
Morse,  John,  Nurseryman.  W.  M.,  Salem  Town,  326  ;  H.  P.,  Salem  Town
chap.,  U.  D. ;  Eoyal  and  Select  Master;  E.  C,  Salem  Town  com.,  16  ;  P.  Dst.
Depty.  G.  M.
Warrick,  Eenslaer,  Boot  and  Shoe  Manufacturer  and  Farmer.  J.  D.,  Salem
Town,  326.
Waters,  Charles  P.,  Saddle  and  Harness  Manufacturer.  S.  D.,  Salem  Town,
326.
Wayne,  Wm.  G.,  Merchant.     Sec,  Salem  Town,  326.
CHAMPLAIN',  Clinton  County.
Allason,  Wm.,  Merchant.     Treas.,  Champlain,  237.
Bell,  Wm.,  Manufacturer  and  Dealer  in  Marble.     Champlain,  237.
Daggett,  W.  S.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.     P.  S.  W.,  Champlain,  237.
Dodds,  James  B.,  Merchant.     J.  D.,  Champlain,  237.
Dunning,  P.  F.,  Merchant.     Champlain,  237.
Holcomb,  D.  S.,  Proprietor  Champlain  House.     W.  M.,  Champlain,  237 ;
E.  A.  Mason.
Miner,  H.  A.,  Blacksmith.     Sec,  Champlain,  237.
Moore,  S.  M.,  Manufacturer  Agricultural  Implements.   P.  M.,  Champlain,  237.
CHEMUNG,  Chemung  County.
Buck,  G.  W.,  Farmer  and  Produce  Dealer.    P.  M.,  Chemung  Valley,  350.
Daly,  Peter,  Farming  and  Eailroading.     Port  Jervis,  328.

--- Sayfa 304 ---
292  world's  masonic  register.
Elliott,  Abraham,  Cooper.     Chemung  Valley,  350.
Gardner,  David,  Merchant.  P.  J.  W.,  Chemung  Valley,  350 ;  Union  chap.,
16,  Pa. ;  Northern  com.,  16.
Gere,  Andrus,  Boot  and  Shoe  Dealer.     W.  M.,  Chemung  Valley,  350.
Guthrie,  Wm.,  Proprietor  Junction  Hotel.  Initiated  a.l.  5822,  Chemung
Valley,  350.
Nichols,  Oliver,  Merchant.     Chemung  Valley,  350.
Robins,  M.  S.,  Blacksmith.    J.  W.,  Chemung  Valley,  350.
CLATEEACK,  Columbia  County.
Owen,  D.  D.,  Teacher  in  Hudson  River  Institute.  Hudson.  7 ;  Hudson  chap.,
6  ;  Lafayette  com.,  7.
COHOES.
Black,  Daniel,  Foreman  Machinist,  Ogden  Mills.     Cohoes,  116.
Bogue,  H.  S.,  Coal  Merchant,  Surgeon  St.  Cohoes,  116 ;  P.  H.  P.,  Cohoes
chap.,  168.
Conaughty,  Wm.  H.,  Master  Machinist,  Tivoli  Mills.  Cohoes,  116  ;  Cohoes
chap.,  168.
Dixon,  Elijah  T.,  Foreman  Carding  and  Spinning  Department,  Bailey  Manu-
facturing Company.     Cohoes,  116  ;  Cohoes  chap.,  168  ;  Apollo  com.,  15.
Evans,  H.  S.,  Carder  and  Spinner,  Ogden  Mills.  Cohoes,  116  ;  Cohoes  chap.,
168.
Ferguson,  P.  B.  Builder.    W.  M.,  Cohoes,  116 ;  Cohoes  chap.,  168.
Frink,  J.  W.,  Merchant.     Cohoes,  116  ;  Cohoes  chap.,  168.
Howard,  Thos.  R.,  Livery  Stable-keeper,  Ransom  St.  Cohoes,  116 ;  K.,
Cohoes  chap.,  168.
Jackson,  George,  Foreman,  Machinist,  Knitting  Department,  Bailey  Manu-
facturing Company.     Cohoes,  116;  Cohoes  chap.,  168  ;  Apollo  com.,  15.
Melendy,  Alonzo,  Foreman  Adams  &  Co.'s  Knitting  Department,  Seneca  St.
Cohoes,  116.
Schoonmaker,  Jr.,  P.,  Ambrotype  and  Photograph  Artist,  Mohawk  St.
Cohoes,  116  ;  Cohoes  chap.,  168  ;  Apollo  com.,  15.
Wakeman,  J.,  Book-keeper,  H.  Adams  &  Co.,  Factory  St.     Cohoes,  116.
COLD  SPEI5TGS.
Dalzell,  Robert  E.,  Grocery  and  Provision  Store,  corner  Main  and  Fair  Sts.
Phillipstown,  236.
Dlee,  Morris,  Merchant  Tailor,  Main  St.,  near  H.  R.  Railroad.  Phillips-
town,  236.
Ladue,  "Wm.  A.,  Carpenter  and  Builder.    Phillipstown,  236.
Lawson,  Peter  B.,  Engineer  West  Point  Laundry.  P.  Dist.  Dep.  G.  M.  and
W.  M.,  Phillipstown,  236.
Livingston,  Levi  L.,  House,  Sign,  and  Decorative  Painter.  Phillipstown,
236.
Merrick,  Wm.  H.,  Boiler-maker,  West  Point  Foundery.     Phillipstown,  236.
Neil,  Andrew,  Machinist,  West  Point  Foundery.     Phillipstown,  236.
Nelson,  Jacob  K,  Merchant  Tailor,  Main  St.     Phillipstown,  236.
Nimmo,  Jas.,  Finisher,  West  Point  Foundery.     Phillipstown,  236.
Tritschler,  Charles,  Machinist,  West  Point  Foundery.     Phillipstown,  236.

--- Sayfa 305 ---
NEW  YORK.  293
COKNING,  Steuben  County.
Brown,  David  P.,  Attorney  and  Counselor  at  Law.    Painted  Post,  117.
Eves,  John,  Locomotive  Engineer.    S.  W.,  Painted  Post,  117.
Field,  Major  A.,  Proprietor  Dickinson  House.
Gamman,  Charles  May,  Boot  and  Shoe  Dealer.    W.  M.,  Painted  Post,  117.
Hall,  Henry  S.,  Locomotive  Engineer.    Painted  Post,  117.
Harvey,  Lumberman,  Lumberman.   Addison  Union,  118  ;  Addison  chap.,  146.
May,  J.  C,  Mail  Messenger  and  U.  S.  Detective  Police.    Painted  Post,  117.
Baymond,  Tunis,  Baggage  Master  N.  Y.  and  E.  Bailroad.     Painted  Post,  117.
Bobinson,  J.  N.,  Clothing,  Hats,  Caps,  etc.    P.  M.,  Painted  Post,  117.
Spaulding,  Francis  E.,  Locomotive  Engineer.     J.  W.,  Painted  Post,  117.
Spencer,  Wm.  A.,  Captain  Canal  Boat.     P.  M.,  Painted  Post,  117.
Traver,  Geo.  W.  C,  Wagon  and  Carriage  Manufacturer.     Painted  Post,  117.
Van  Etten,  Simon,  Deputy  Sheriff.  S.  M.  of  Ceremonies  Painted  Post,  117  ;
Boyal  Arch  Mason ;  P.  S.  B.,  St.  Omer's  com.,  19.
Webb,  Z.  Lewis,  Ex-Judge,  Justice  of  Peace,  and  Commissioner  of  Deeds  for
Western  States.  P.  M.,  Sylvan,  41 ;  P.  H.  P.,  Addison  chap.,  146 ;  Past  P.
C.  of  Work,  Monroe  coun.,  1,  Mich. ;  Past  G.  Scribe  G.  C,  Michigan.
Wilson,  Thomas.  Painted  Post,  117;  Banbridge,  336,  Ireland;  Banbridge
chap.,  Ireland ;  K.  T.
r  '  COHTLAFD,  Cortland  County.
Hunter,  Stephen  B.,  Merchant  and  Inventor  Broadcast  Seeding  Machine.
S.  W.,  Cortlandville,  470.
CKOTOET  FALLS.
Banta,  Peter,  Couductoi'.N/'X.  and  Harlem  Bailroad.     Croton,  368.
CUBA,  Allegany  County.
Acomb,  James  L.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.  W.  M.,  Cuba,  306 ;  Genesee
Biver  chap.,  152.
Bishop,  A.  C,  Civil  Engineer.  P.  J.  and  S.  W.,  Cuba,  306 ;  Wells ville
chap.,  143.
Brooks,  John,  Proprietor  Lafayette  Hotel  and  Teacher  of  Dancing.  Made
in  Oxford  Lodge,  67,  Ohio.
Chamberlain,  General  C.  T.,  Ex- Judge  and  Agriculturalist.  P.  M.,  Cuba,
306 ;  Hamilton  chap.,  62  ;  G.,  Monroe  com.,  12.
Maxon,  B.  T.,  Bailroad  Agent.     Cuba,  306.
Park,  E.  W.,  Contractor  of  Jobs  and  Farmer.  Cuba,  306 ;  Wellsville  chap.,
143  ;  St.  John's  com.,  24.
Bussell,  Samuel  M.,  Attorney  and  Broker.     Cuba,  306  ;  Wellsville  chap.,  143.
Stevens,  E.  A.,  Deputy  Postmaster.     Cuba,  306.
Story,  James  A.,  Dry  Goods,  Groceries,  etc.     Cuba,  306.
Story,  Jr.,  Samuel,  Dry  Goods,  Groceries,  etc.     Cuba,  306.
Swift,  S.  P.,  firm  of  G.  D.  &  S.  P.  Swift,  Dry  Goods  Dealers.  S.  W.,  Cuba,
306 ;  Wellsville  chap.,  143.

--- Sayfa 306 ---
294  world's  masonic  register.
DEPOSIT,  Delaware  County.
Belknap,  D.  K.,  Train  Dispatcher.     P.  J.  W.,  Deposit,.  396.
Crocker,  D.  W.,  Division  Foreman  or  Supervisor  N.  Y.  and  E.  Railroad.
S.  W.,  Deposit,  396.
Dean,  S.  O.,  Merchant.     S.  M.  of  C,  Deposit,  396.
Hadley,  B.  E.,  Merchant  and  Lumber  Dealer.     Deposit,  396.
Holbrook,  S.  L.,  Ticket  Agent  and  Telegraph  Operator  N.  Y.  and  B.  Rail-
road.    S.  D.,  Deposit,  396.
Knapp,  Chas.,  President  Deposit  Bank.  W.  M.,  Deposit,  396;  initiated
a.l.  5824.
McClure,  ¥m.,  Surveyor.    P.  S.  W.,  Deposit,  396 ;  initiated  a.l.  5818.
Sherwood,  E.  T.,  Proprietor  Sherwood  House.     Deposit,  396.
White,  Adolphe,  Merchant  Tailor.    Deposit,  396 ;  Corinthian  chap.,  159.
DtrcyKIBK,  Chautauque  County.
Averill,  Benj.  P.,  Foreman  Painter  in  N.  Y.  and  E.  Railroad  Shop.  Tronde-
quoit,  301.
Bond,  Solomon,  Master  Steamer  Portsmouth.     Irondequoit,  301.
Brooks,  H.  G.,  Master  Mechanic  Western  Division  N.  Y.  and  E.  Railroad.
Irondequoit,  301;  Aurora  chap.,  13,  Indiana;  Aurora  coun.,  7,  Indiana.
Caldwell,  Stephen  D.,  Manager  N.  Y.  and  Erie  Line  of  Steamers,  anil  Agent
N.  Y.  and  E.  Railroad.  P.  S.  W.,  Irondequoit,  301;  H.  P.,  Fredonia  chap.,
76  ;  S.  W.,  Hugh  de  Payen's  com.,  30.
Camp,  A.  W.,  Soap  and  Candle  Manufacturer.  Irondequoit,  301 ;  Fredonia
chap.,  76 ;  Hugh  de  Payen's  com.,  30.
Chapman,  A.  F.,  Machinist.    Arcana,  272,  Crestline,  Ohio.
Dickinson,  Colonel  S.  H.,  retired  from  business.  P.  M.,  Forest,  166  ;  P.  H.
P.,  Fredonia  chap.,  76 ;  Hugh  de  Payen's  com.,  30 ;  P.  Sen.  G.  D.,  Grand
Lodge;  Past  District  Deputy  Grand  Master.
Doyle,  Stephen  M.,  Naval  Store-keeper  N.  Y.  and  E.  Railroad  Steamers.
W.  M.,  Irondequoit,  301 ;  C.  H.,  Fredonia  chap.,  76  ;  Hugh  de  Payen's  com.,  30.
Durrell,  John  N.,  Foreman  N.  Y.  and  E.  Railroad  Machine  Shop.  Ironde-
quoit, 301.
Finkle,  Walter,  Proprietor  Eastern  Hotel.  Irondequoit,  301 ;  Fredonia
chap.,  76.
Forster,  Theodore  M.,  Machinist.    Irondequoit,  301.
Grosvenor,  Thomas  P.,  Attorney  at  Law.  P.  M.,  Irondequoit,  301 ;  Past
Deputy  Grand  Master.
Hyde,  L.  L.,  Stock  Agent  and  Keeper  of  Stock  Yards  for  N.  Y.  and  E.  Rail-
road.    Presque  Isle,  235,  Erie,  Pa. ;  Fredonia  chap.,  76.
Irwin,  Charles  K.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.     S.  W.,  Irondequoit,  301.
Marcus,  L.,  Dry  Goods  Merchant.    Irondequoit,  301 ;  Fredonia  chap.,  76.
McKenzie,  James,  Machinist.    Irondequoit,  301.
Mitchell,  James  S.,  Master  Steamer  Elmira.    Erie,  161.
Post,  Ira  A.,  Conductor  N.  Y.  and  E.  Railroad.    Irondequoit,  301.
Russell,  David,  Machinist.    Irondequoit,  301.

--- Sayfa 307 ---
NEW  YORK.  295
Sheehan,  Thomas,  Foreman  N.  Y.  and  E.  Eailroad  Blacksmith  Shop.  Past
Tyler,  Irondequoit,  301.
Williams,  Rev.  E.  0.,  retired  Presbyterian  Minister,  and  Druggist.  Chap-
lain, Irondequoit,  301 ;  Chaplain  and  P.  S.,  Predonia  chap.,  76 ;  De  Molay
com.,  22.
Wyman,  Wm.  H.,  Clerk  in  Dunkirk  Shop  N.  Y.  and  E.  Eailroad.  Predonia
chap.,  76 ;  De  Molay  com.,  22.
EAST  CLARKBOBT,  Monroe  County.
Tolford,  Thomas,  Postmaster.    Monroe,  173.
EAST  VENICE,  Cayuga  County.
Smith,  Lewis,  Merchant.     Cayuga,  221.
■     ELMIBA,  Chemung  County.
Beardsley,  Benoni  P.,  Manufacturer  Edge-tools.  Treasurer,  Union,  95 ;
Secretary,  Elmira  chap.,  42 ;  Treasurer,  Southern  Tier  coun.,  16;  E.  C,  St.
Omer's  com.,  19.
Cooley,  Jesse  L.,  Deputy  Postmaster.  W.  M.,  Ivy,  397 ;  H.  P.,  Elmira  chap.,
42  ;  Recorder,  Southern  Tier  coun.,  16  ;  P.  Generalissimo,  St.  Omer's  com.,  19.
De  Witt,  Charles,  Billiard  and  Befreshment  Saloon.  Addison  Union,  118  ;
Addison  chap.,  146.
'  Gillett,  Charles  E.,  Conductor  N.  Y.  and  E.  Railroad.  J.  W.,  Ivy,  397 ;  P.
S.,  Elmira  chap.,  42  ;  Thrice  111.  G.  M.,  Southern  Tier  coun.,  16  ;  G.  Marshal,
Grand  Council ;  J.  W.,  St.  Omer's  com.,  19  ;  Grand  Sword  Bearer,  Grand  Com.
Griffith,  P.  R.,  Wholesale  Wine  and  Liquor  Dealer.  Ivy,  397 ;  Elmira  chap.,
42  ;  St.  Omer's  com.,  19.
Lee,  Wm.,  Chief  of  Police  and  Founder  of  Red  Jacket  Garden.  Ivy,  397 ;
P.  C.  H.,  Elmira  chap.,  42;  Deputy  T.  111.  G.  M.,  Southern  Tier  coun.,  16  ;  P.
Eminent  P.,  St.  Omer's  com.,  19.
Merrill,  E.  C,  Proprietor  Delavan  House.  J.  D.,  Ivy,  397 ;  Elmira  chap.,
42  ;  Southern  Tier  coun.,  16.
Norton,  Charles  H.,  Conductor  N.  Y.  and  E.  Railroad.     Ivy,  397.
FACTORTVILLE,  Tioga  County.
Orsborn,  John  T.,  Grocer.     Waverly,  407.
Tew,  Elisha,  Blacksmith.    Waverly,  407.
EISHKILL  LANDING-.
Bell,  Wm.  P.,  M.D.    P.  M.,  Beacon,  283.
Mackay,  A.  Rufus,  Agent  Hudson  River  Railroad.     Phillipstown,  236.
Meyer,  Louis,  Meyer's  Hotel.     Beacon,  283.
Rogers,  Wm.  H.,  Tin,  Copper,  and  Sheet  Iron  Warehouse.     Beacon,  283.
Shurter,  James  E.,  Lumber  and  Coal  Merchant,  Long  Dock.     W.  M.,  Bea-
con, 283.
FORT  EDWAKD.
Cray,  E.  A.,  Wines  and  Liquors.    Fort  Edward,  267 ;  Glenn's  Falls  chap.,
154.
Fox,  W.  A.,  Tailor,  Broadway.     Fort  Edward,  267.

--- Sayfa 308 ---
296  world's  masonic  register.
Higgins,  S.  W.,  Groceries  and  Provisions.  Fort  Edward,  267  ;  Glenn's  Falls
chap.,  154.
Kenney,  Francis  J.  J.,  Boarding-house,  Canal  Lock.  P.  M.,  Apollo,  13 ;
P.  M.,  Fort  Edward,  267;  P.  H.  P.,  Glenn's  Falls  chap.,  154;  Apollo  com.,  15.
Mosheer,  Geo.  B.,  Lumber  Dealer.  Fort  Edward,  267  ;  Glenn's  Falls  chap.,
154.
Ottman,  William  P.,  Ready-made  Clothing  and  Gent's  Furnishing  Store,  1
Wing's  Exchange.    Fort  Edward,  267.
Sherwood,  B.  W.,  Dealer  in  Lumber,  etc.  Fort  Edward,  267  ;  Glenn's  Falls
chap.,  154.
Usher,  Hiram,  Miller  and  Grain  Dealer.  Fort  Edward,  267 ;  Glenn's  Falls
chap.,  154.
Wells,  Caleb,  Lumber  Dealer.  W.  M.,  Fort  Edward,  267 ;  Glenn's  Falls  chap.,
154.
EKEDONIA,  Chautauque  County.
Burritt,  F.,  Druggist.    W.  M.,  Forest,  166.
Chapman,  L.,  Nurseryman  and  Agriculturalist.    Forest,  166.
Frisbee,  J.  C,  and  L.  L.  Pratt,  Publishers  Fredonia  Advertiser.    Forest,  166.
Gardner,  R.  W.,  Seedsman.    Forest,  166.
Lake,  S.  S.,  Proprietor  Johnson  House.    J.  D.,  Forest,  166.
Norton,  E.,  Milling.    J.  D.,  Forest,  166  ;  R.  A.  C,  Fredonia  chap.,  76.
Sloan,  Devillo,  Agriculturalist.    Forest,  166.
Stevens,  Jr.,  P.  H.,  Clothing  Merchant.     Forest,  166.
Tolls,  J.  S.,  Architect  and  Builder.    Master  Mason ;  Eureka  chap.;  Coun.
FKIENDSHIP,  Allegany  County.
Hart,  William  A.,  Merchant.     Allegany,  225;  chap.
Hartshorn,  Gen.  Ira  D.,  Merchant.    Allegany,  225.
Olney,  John  F.,  Justice  of  the  Peace.     P.  M.,  Allegany,  225.
Robinson,  Gen.  Geo.  W.,  Merchant  and  Banker.    Past  M.,  Allegany,  225.
Scott,  Martin,  Merchant.     P.  M.,  Allegany,  225.
Scott,  Warren,  Dry  Goods  Merchant.     S.  W.,  Allegany,  225.
FULTON.
Simons,  A.  B.    W.  M.,  Callimachus,  369 ;  P.  K.,  Mexico  chap.,  135.
GENESEE,  Ontario  County.
Codington,  J.  M.,  Railroad  Agent.    Joppa,  29.
GENEVA,  Ontario  County.
Anthony,  S.  N,  House,  Sign,  and  Ornamental  Painter.  W.  M.,  Ark,  33;
Secretary,  Geneva  chap.,  36.
Dakin,  E.,  Commission  and  Forwarding  Merchant.  Treasurer,  Ark,  33;
Treasurer,  Geneva  chap.,  36.
Darrant,  William  P.,  Watch-maker  and  Jeweler.    Secretary,  Ark,  33.

--- Sayfa 309 ---
NEW   YORK.  297
Edington,  Dr.  Wm.  F.,  Dentist.  P.  Secretary,  Reading,  123;  Member
Ark,  33.
Flower,  Davison,  Sashes,  Blinds,  Doors,  Glass,  Oils,  "Wall  Paper,  etc.   Ark,  33.
Huke,  Geo.  D.,  Sash  and  Blind  Manufacturer.    Ark,  33.
McFeggan,  Geo.,  Agent  N.  Y.  and  C.  Railroad.  P.  J.  W.,  Ark,  33  ;  G.  M.
3d  Veil,  Geneva  chap.,  36.
Moore,  A.  W.,  firm  of  "Wride  &  Moore,  Insurance  and  Commission  Agents.
Past  Secretary,  Ark,  33  ;  G.  M.  3d  Veil,  Geneva  chap.,  36 ;  J.  W.,  Geneva
com.,  29.
Owen,  Geo.  A.,  Mercantile  Clerk.    Ark,  33 ;  Geneva  chap.,  36.
Parker,  S.  H.,  Editor  and  Proprietor  Geneva  Gazette,  and  Postmaster.
Ark,  33.
Platner,  Jno.  S.,  Dry  Goods  Merchant.  J.  D.,  Ark,  33  ;  Geneva  chap.,  36  ;
"Warder,  Geneva  com.,  29.
Shimer,  Isaac,  Coal  Dealer  and  Parmer.  J.  "W.,  Ark,  33 ;  P.  S.,  Geneva
chap.,  36  ;  S.  W.,  Geneva  com.,  29.
Suydam,  H.  L.,  Proprietor  Gem  Dining  Saloon,  Bakery,  Confectionery,  etc.
Ark,  33 ;  Geneva  chap.,  36  ;  Geneva  com.,  29.
Van  Lew,  Wm.,  Grocer  and  Blacksmith.  Initiated  a.l.  5822,  in  Union,  114,
member  Ark,  33.
Veazie,  Thomas,  Proprietor  Veazie  House.    Seneca  Lake,  308.
"Wneat,  Corydon,  Importer  and  Dealer  in  China,  Glass,  and  Earthen  "Ware.
P.  M.,  Ark,  33  ;  King,  Geneva  chap.,  36 ;  Eminent  C,  Geneva  com.,  29.
GOSHEN,  Orange  County.
Dikeman,  E.,  Druggist.     P.  Secretary,  Goshen,  365.
Farrand,  Hiram  T.,   "Watches,    Jewelry,  Silver  "Ware,  etc.    P.  Treasurer,
Goshen,  365.
Hoffman,  James  P.,  Attorney  at  Law.     Secretary,  Goshen,  365.
McConnell,  John  C,  Attorney  at  Law.     "W.  M.,  Goshen,  365.
Thompson,  J.  H.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.    J.  W.,  Goshen,  365.
Vanduzer,  E.  Gedney,  Attorney  at  Law.     S.  "W.,  Goshen,  365.
HANCOCK,  Delaware  County.
Castle,  "Wm.,  Lumberman,  Farmer,  etc.    Deposit,  396.
Chamberlain,  A.  B.,  Agent  N.  Y.  and  E.  Railroad  and  U.  S.  Express  Agent.
Deposit,  396.
Doyle,  J.  H.,  Deputy  Postmaster  and  Mercantile  Salesman.     Deposit,  396.
Fraser,  S.  J.,  Attorney  at  Law.     Deposit,  396.
Hawk,  Geo.  H.,  Farmer  and  Lumberman.     Deposit,  396.
Hunter,  John,  Proprietor  "Western  Hotel.    Samaritan  Lodge.
Lakin,  Edwin,  Lumberman.     Deposit,  396.
Malin,  Addison  P.,  Foreman  N.  Y.  and  E.  Railroad.     Deposit,  396.
Quicksall,  Samuel,  American  Hotel.     Binghamton,  177.
Treadwell,  R.  W.,  Depot  Clerk  N.  Y.  and  E.  Railroad.     Deposit,  396.
Wheeler,  Fred.  M.,  firm  of  F.  M.  &  D.  C.  "Wheeler,  Merchants.     Deposit,  396.
Whittaker,  John  T.,  Butcher  and  Lumberman.    Deposit,  396.

--- Sayfa 310 ---
298  world's  masonic  register.
hastings.
Campbell,  Samuel.     St.  John's  Blue,  675,  Ireland.
King,  John,  Marble-cutter.     Solomon's,  196.
King,  John  P.,  Marble- cutter.     Lexington,  310.
Webber,  John  N,  Marble-cutter.     Lexington,  310.
HOEKTELLSVILLE.
Anderson,  James,  Machinist,  New  York  and  Erie  Eailroad.  Hornellsville,
331.
Bennett,  E.,  Attorney  at  Law.  Hornellsville,  331 ;  Steuben  chap.,  101 ;  De
Molay  com.,  22.
Bowen,  E.,  TJ.  S.  Express  Agent,  Drugs,  etc.  W.  M.,  Hornellsville,  331 ;  Steu-
ben chap.,  101 ;  De  Molay  com.,  22.
Collier,  J.  D.,  Grocer  and  Commission  Merchant.  P.  M.,  Hornellsville,  331;
P.  K.,  Steuben  chap.,  101 ;  P.  G,  De  Molay  com.,  22.
Connell,  Thomas,  Machinist,  New  York  and  Erie  Eailroad.  Hornellsville,
331.
De  Witt,  Benj.  C,  Grocer  and  Commission  Merchant.  Hornellsville,  331 ;
Steuben  chap.,  101 ;  De  Molay  com.,  22.
Gardner,  W.,  Engineer  and  Machinist,  New  York  and  Erie  Eailroad.  Hor-
nellsville, 331 ;  Steuben  chap.,  101.
Latham,  John,  Foreman  Machine  Shop,  New  York  and  Erie  Eailroad.  Hor-
nellsville, 331.
Lillie,  John  H.,  Manager  of  Levees  of  Dollie  Dutton.     Hornellsville,  331.
Martin,  J.  P.,  Master  Mechanic  and  Engine  Dispatcher,  New  York  and  Erie
Eailroad.     Hornellsville,  331;  Steuben  chap.,  101 ;  De  Molay  com.,  22.
Pratt,  H.  P.  V.,  Master  of  Track  Eepairs,  New  York  and  Erie  Eailroad.
Cattaraugus,  239 ;  New  Jerusalem  chap.,  47 ;  De  Molay  com.,  22.
Wilbur,  J.  T.,  Attorney  at  Law.  P.  M.,  Hornellsville,  331 ;  Steuben  chap.,
101 ;  P.  E.  C,  De  Molay  com.,  22 ;  P.  D.  D.  G.  M. ;  J.  W.  Gr.  Com.
ITHACA,  Tompkins  County.
Bishop,  Hiram  W.,  M.D.  and  Druggist.  W.  M.,  Fidelity,  51 ;  Secretary,
Eagle  chap.,  58.
Butler,  Vincent  C,  Hardware  Founderyman  and  Machinist.     Fidelity,  51.
Byington,  Justin,  Mercantile  Clerk.    Fidelity,  51 ;  Eagle  chap.,  58.
Goodrich,  A.  L.,  Capt.  Kate  Morgan  Steamer  on  Cayuga  Lake.    Fidelity,  51.
Heggie,  J.  M.,  Coach  and  Saddlery  Hardware.  Treasurer,  Fidelity,  51 ;  King,
Eagle'chap.,  58.
Holmes,  S.  A.,  Under  Sheriff  and  Livery-keeper.  P.  M.,  Fidelity,  51 ;  G.M.
3d  Veil,  Eagle  chap.,  58.
Millspaugh,  Leander,  Saddle  and  Harness  Manufacturer.  S.  W.,  Fidelity,  51;
G.  M.  2d  Veil,  Eagle  chap.,  58.
Platts,  Hervey,  Manufacturer  Calender  Clocks.  P.  M.,  Fidelity,  51 ;  H.  P.,
Eagle  chap.,  58.
Selkreg,  J.  H.,  Editor  and  Proprietor  of  Ithaca  Journal.  P.  S.  W.,  Fi-
delity, 51.

--- Sayfa 311 ---
NEW   YORK.  299
Wells,  Edward  L.,  Real  Estate  Agent  and  Attorney.    P.  M.,  Fidelity,  51 ;
P.  H.  P.  and  S.,  Eagle  chap.,  58.
Whitlock,  Wm,  Grocer.    P.  J.  and  S.  W.,  Fidelity,  51.
JAMESTOWN,  Chautauque  County.
Baker,  Robert  I.,  Cutter  for  Hall  &  Grant.  S.  W.,  Mt.  Moriah,  145 ;  P.  S.,
Western  Sun  chap.,  67.  i
Barker,  W.  W.,  Clerk  in  Leather  Store.  S.  M.  of  Ceremonies,  Mt.  Moriah;
145 ;  Western  Sun  chap.,  67.
Brown,  Samuel  A.,  Special  Surrogate  and  Attorney  at  Law.  Mt.  Moriah,
145;  Western  Sun  chap.,  67.
Cady,  S.  S.,  Merchant  and  Butter  Dealer.    Past  Treas.,  Mt.  Moriah,  145.
Eddy,  C.  W.,  Book-keeper  for  Hall  &  Grant.  P.  S.  D.,  Mt.  Moriah,  145 ;
R.  A.  C,  Western  Sun  chap.,  67.
Field,  James  V.,  Deputy  Postmaster.  Mt.  Moriah,  145  ;  Secretary,  Western
Sun  chap.,  67.
Hazzard,  Jason,  Grocery  and  Provision  Dealer.  Initiated  May,  a.l.  5826 ;
exalted  February,  a.l.  5827.  Treasurer,  Mt.  Moriah,  145 ;  Treasurer,  Western
Sun  chap.,  67.
Kinne,  0.  B.,  Grocery  and  Provision  Dealer.  P.  Sect'y,  Mt.  Moriah,  145 ;
Mark  Master  Mason.
Lawson,  Samuel  J.,  Mercantile  Clerk.    Mt.  Moriah,  145.
Loucks,  A.  H.,  Chief  of  Police  and  Constable.    Mt.  Moriah,  145.
Mahew,  J.  Edward,  Cashier  of  Jamestown  Bank.     Mt.  Moriah,  145.
Mason,  Levant  L.,  Jeweler  and  Watch  Repairer.  P.  M.,  Mt.  Moriah,  145 ;
King,  Western  Sun  chap.,  67.
Mathews,  Joseph  S.,  Book-keeper  and  Cashier  for  S.  W.  Parks,  Merchant.
W.  M.,  Mt.  Moriah,  145  ;  G.  M.  of  2d  Veil,  Western  Sun  chap.,  67.
Smith,  John  Fellows,  Attorney  at  Law.     Mt.  Moriah,  145.
Weeks,  A.  J.,  Grocery  and  Provision  Dealer.  J.  W.  and  P.  M.,  Mt.  Moriah,
145.
KINGSTON.
Bernstein,  Isaac,  Merchant.     Kingston,  10.
Chipp,  Jr.,  John,  Book  and  Stationery  Store,  32  Wall  St.     Kingston,  10.
Chipp,  Warren,  Merchant.  W.  M.,  Kingston,  10 ;  P.  G.  Steward,  and  D.  D.
G.  M.  of  Third  District ;  P.  H.  P.,  Mount  Horeb  chap.,  75.
Hayes,  Wm.  M.,  Boot  and  Shoe  Dealer.  Kingston,  10 ;  P.  H.  P.,  Mount
Horeb  chap.,  75.
Langsworth,  John  S.,  Iron  Founder.     Kingston,  10 ;  Mount  Horeb  chap.,  75.
Steele,  John  B.,  Attorney  at  Law,  Wall  St.  Kingston,  10  ;  P.  H.  P.,  Mount
Horeb  chap.,  75.
LANSINGBUBG.
Bell,  John,  Groceries  and  Provisions,  372  State  St.    Phoenix,  58.
Bernard,  Louis,  Baker,  1  Richard  St.     King  Solomon's  Primitive,  91.
Butler,  M.  G.,  Butler's  House,  375  State  St.     Phoenix,  58.
Davis,  C.  A.,  Davis  House,  337  State  St.     Phoenix,  58 ;  Phoenix  chap.,  133.
20

--- Sayfa 312 ---
300  world's  masonic  register.
Hathaway,  B.  G.,  Mechanic  and  President  of  Lansingburg  Office,  3  State  St.
P.  M.,  Jerusalem,  355.
Holden,  Geo.  W.,  Foreman  Baker,  1  Bichard  St.  Jerusalem,  355 ;  Phoenix
chap.,  133.
Houghton,  0.  S.,  Union  House,  287  State  St.  Phcenix,  58 ;  Phoenix  chap.,
133  ;  Apollo  com.,  15.
Lavender,  Stephen,  Cabinet  Warehouse,  State  St.  Jerusalem,  355  ;  Phoenix
chap.,  133.
Lusty,  David,  House,  Sign,  and  Ornamental  Painter,  State  St.  Jerusalem,
355.
Mors,  Charles  H.,  Mors's  Flouring  and  Saw  Mill,  54  Second  St.    Clinton,  140.
Sayles,  Thos.,  Patent  Agent,  State  St.    Jerusalem,  355 ;  Phoenix  chap.,  133.
Sitser,  Cornelius  M.,  Machinist,  298  Biver  St.    Jerusalem,  355.
Snyder,  A.  C,  Druggist  and  Chemist,  292  State  St.  Jerusalem,  355 ;  Phoenix
chap.,  133.
LEEOr.
Anderson,  John  B.  W.  M.,  Olive  Branch,  39 ;  Western  Star  chap.,  35  ;
Monroe  com.,  12  ;  D.  D.  G.  M.,  Sixteenth  Masonic  District.
LITTLE  GENESEE.
Prosser,  Judge  Isaac,  Merchant  and  Lumberman.     Cuba,  306.
Wellman,  Warren  W.,  Merchant.     Macedonia,  258.
LOCKPOKT.
Blake,  E.  L.,  First  Clerk,  N.  Y.  C.  Bailroad,  4  Pine  St.     Niagara,  375.
Clement,  Thos.,  Blacksmith  and  Carriage  Builder,  66  Clinton  St.  Lockport,
73 ;  Ames  chap.,  88.
Craig,  Charles,  Book-keeper.  P.  M.,  Cataract,  295  ;  P.  H.  P.,  Ames  chap.,
88  ;  Adelphic  coun.,  7  ;  Genesee  com.,  10.
Murphy,  Philip.  P.  M.,  Lockport,  73 ;  Ames  chap.,  88  ;  Bruce  coun.,  15 ;
Genesee  com.,  10.
Steele,  Jerome,  Clerk.    Niagara,  375  ;  Ames  chap.,  88.
Suit,  Stephen,  Track- master  of  Western  Divison  New  York  Central  Bailroad.
Lockport,  73 ;  Ames  B.  A.  Chapter,  88  ;  Bruce  coun.,  15 ;  Genesee  com.,  10.
MADRID,  St.  Lawrence  County.
Dillingham,  J.  C,  Drugs,  Groceries,  Paints,  etc.  Secretary,  Grass  Biver,
312.
Lovegrove,  Beuben,  Merchant  and  Farmer.  J.  W.,  Grass  Biver,  312.  First
Mason  initiated  in  this  Lodge  since  5826  ;  Boyal  Arch  Mason.
Parker,  F.  B.,  Merchant.     Grass  Biver,  312  ;  Plattsburg  chap.,  39.
Pierce,  Caleb,  Physician  and  Surgeon.  Initiated  a.l.  5825;  P.  Secretary,
Grass  Biver,  312.
Eichardson,  Henry  B.,  Justice  of  the  Peace  and  Cabinet  Manufacturer.
Initiated  a.l.  5828 ;  P.  M.,  Grass  Biver,  312 ;  B.  A.  Mason.
Bobinson,  O.  C,  Merchant.     S.  W.,  Grass  Biver,  312.
Boss,  A.,  Traveling  Agent.     P.  S.  W.,  Grass  Biver,  312.
Smith,  Hugh,  Boot  and  Shoe  Dealer.     W.  M.,  Grass  Biver,  312.

--- Sayfa 313 ---
NEW   YOEK.  301
MALOUE,  Franklin  County.
Brewster,  H.  S.,  Chief  Clerk,  Sup't  Office  N.  N.  Y.  Railroad;  W.  M.,
Northern  Constellation,  291 ;  C.  H.,  Northern  Constellation  chap.,  28.
Conant,  Marshall,  Clerk  N.  N.  Y.  Railroad.  Secretary,  Northern  Constella-
tion, 291 ;  Northern  Constellation  chap.,  28.
Coonley,  D.  S.,  Frontier  P.  0.,  Clinton  Co.,  Merchant.  Northern  Constella-
tion, 291.
Duane,  Albert,  Railroad  Employee,  Burke,  N.  Y.     Norfolk,  405.
Flanders,  Col.  F.  D.,  Proprietor  of  Franklin  Gazette,  and  Postmaster.  P.  M.,
Northern  Constellation,  291 ;  H.  P.,  Northern  Constellation  chap.,  28 ;  Dist.
Deputy  G.  M.,  N.  Y.
Gray,  Win.  H.,  Locomotive  Engineer.     Northern  Constellation,  291.
Heath,  A.,  Grocer.  P.  J.  and  S.  W.,  Northern  Constellation,  291 ;  Northern
Constellation  chap.,  28.
Hubbard,  Charles  L.,  Merchant.     J.  D.,  Northern  Constellation,  291.
Knapp,  Nathan.  Merchant.  Northern  Constellation,  291 ;  Northern  Con-
stellation chap.,  28.
Lathrop,  L.  C,  Bookseller  and  Stationer.  Steward,  Northern  Constellation,
291.
Miller,  Philip  B.,  Agriculturalist.  P.  Sec'y,  Northern  Constellation,  291;
G.  M.,  1st  Yeil,  Northern  Constellation  chap.,  28.
Phillips,  James  S.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.  P.  M.,  Franklin,  216 ;  P.  H.  P.,
Northern  Constellation  chap.,  28 ;  Royal  and  S.  Master.
Russell,  Benjamin,  Time-keeper  N.  N.  Y.  Railroad.  P.  M.,  Lake,  424;
G.  M.,  3d  Yeil,  Northern  Constellation  chap.,  28.
Short,  Wm.  A.,  Foreman  of  Locomotive  Engine  Repairs  N.  N.  Y.  Railroad.
S.  D.,  Northern  Constellation,  291.
Thorndike,  Gen.  S.  C.  F.,  Treasurer  Northern  New  York  Railroad.  P.  M.,
Northern  Constellation,  291 ;  King,  Northern  Constellation  chap.,  28.
MIDDLETOW1T,  Orange  County.
Draper,  Joshua,  "Wool  Hat  Manufacturer.    W.  M.,  Hoffman,  412.
Hunt,  H.  H.,  Carpet-bag  Manufacturer,  also  Store,  92  Church  St.,  N.  York.
J.  W.,  Hoffman,  412.
Lytle,  James,  Lumber,  Coal,  Flour,  Produce,  etc.     Hoffman,  412.
Wolfe,  B.  Y.,  Clothing  Merchant.    Hoffman,  412.
MILLPORT,  Chemung  County.
Crandall,  Erastus,  Carpenter  and  Joiner.    Initiated  a.l.  5815 ;   Treasurer,
Old  Oak,  253  ;  R.  A.  Mason.
Frost,  Horton,  Blacksmith.     Old  Oak,  253.
Howell,  E.  W.,  Blacksmith.    W.  M.,  Old  Oak,  253.
Pratt,  Geo.  W.,  Boat-builder.    P.  M.,  Old  Oak,  253.
Weller,  T.  Y.,  Agent  N.  Y.  and  E.  Railroad.    Tyler,  Old  Oak,  253.
MOIKA,  Franklin  County.
Bowen,  N.  C,  Lumber  Manufacturer.    P.  S.  W.,  North  Star,  107.
Bowen,  R.  W.,  Architect  and  Builder.    W.  M.,  North  Star,  107.

--- Sayfa 314 ---
302  -world's  masonic  register.
Lawrence,  C.  J.,  Merchant.     Secretary,  North  Star,  107.
North  Star  Lodge,  107,  meets  Wednesdays  on  or  before  full  moon.
ITEWBTJHG.
Johnson,  James,  Soap-maker.     Newburg,  309.
Little,  Samuel,  Box-maker.    S.  D.,  Newburg,  309.
NEW  TOBK  CITT.
Allen,  Julian,  Wholesale  Importer  and  Manufacturer  of  Tobacco,  Cigars,  etc.,
130  Water  St.  P.  M.,  Abram's,  20 ;  K.,  Orient  chap.,  138 ;  Grand  Steward
Grand  Lodge.
Baldwin,  J.  Theo.,  146  West  Twenty-fourth  St.    Antiqnity,  11.
Brewster,  Nathan,  Jobber  Silks  and  Fancy  Goods,  17  Park  Place.  Mount
Vernon,  64,  Norwalk,  Ohio.
Church,  Charles  L.,  Wine  and  Liquor  Dealer,  527  Hudson  St.  G.  T.  of  the
G.  Lodge  of  N.  Y. ;  P.  M.,  St.  John's,  1 ;  P.  G.  H.  P.  of  Grand  Chapter;  Co-
lumbian com.,  1 ;  G.  H.  of  Cosmopolitan  G.  C.
Jefferys,  George,  Machinist  and  Manufacturer  of  Bose  Engines,  Lathes,  Tools,
Buling  and  Brading  Machines,  etc.,  181  Broadway.     Yew  Tree,  461.
McDermott,  W.  J.,  M.D.  W.  M.,  Wyoming,  492.,  Westchester,  West-
chester County,  N.  Y.
Nixen,  Wm.  W.,  39  Johnson  St.,  Brooklyn.  P.  M.,  Antiquity,  11 ;  P.  H.  P.,
Jerusalem  chap.,  8  ;  P.  G.,  Columbian  com.,  1 ;  Columbian  coun.,  1 ;  P.  D.  G.  M.,
Grand  Council.
Beading,  M.  Ploy,  50  Seventh  St.     S.  D.,  Antiquity,  11.
Van  Brakle,  C.  H.  J.  D.,  Watertown,  49 ;  Secretary,  Watertown  B.  A.
chap.,  59;  Bee,  Watertown  com.,  11 ;  G.  E.P.  and  S.  M.,  N.  Y. ;  G.L.ofP.,1;
E.  of  E.  and  W.,  and  P.  of  J;  S.  P.  B.  C,  18.
Vase,  Bichard,  54  William  St.    J.  D.,  Antiquity,  11.
Wagstaff,  David,  Wholesale  Grocer,  78  Cortlandt  St.  Adelphic,  348  ;  Adel-
phic  chap.,  158  ;  Adelphic  coun.,  7  ;  Morton  com.,  4.
Webb,  Col.  Thomas  S.,  Proprietor  of  National  Hotel,  7  Cortlandt  St.  Clinton,
47,  Ohio  ;  Hiram  chap.,  18,  Ohio ;  Massillon  com.,  4,  Ohio.
White,  James  L.,  Bookseller,  92  West  Twenty-seventh  St.    Mosaic,  418.
Williams,  Thos.  S.,  First  Av.  and  Twenty-third  St.     Secretary,  Harlem,  457.
NIAGAHA  PALLS,  Niagara  County.
Brown,  Geo.  L.,  Locomotive  Engineer.  J.  M.  of  Cer.,  Niagara  Frontier,  132 ;
Ames  chap.,  88  ;  Bruce  coun.,  15.
Brown,  Wesley  P.,  Locomotive  Fireman.     Niagara  Frontier,  132.
Clark,  J.  B.,  Locomotive  Engineer.     Niagara  Frontier,  132  ;  Ames  chap.,  88.
Coleman,  Bobt.  B.,  Proprietor  International  Hotel,  also  Eastern  House,  Bal-
timore, Md.     Niagara  Frontier,  132.
Deutscher,  Julius,  Harness-maker  and  Carriage-trimmer.  Niagara  Frontier,  132.
Gibbs,  Tyler,  Paper  Manufacturer.  J.  W.,  Niagara  Frontier,  132 ;  Ames
chap.,  88.
Graf,  Joseph,  Baggage  Master  N.  Y.  C.  Eailroad.     P.  S.  D.,  Concordia,  143.

--- Sayfa 315 ---
NEW  YORK.  303
Hamlin,  John  P.,  Banker.  Treasurer,  Niagara  Frontier,  132  ;  Fort  Meig's
chap.,  29,  Ohio ;  Toledo  com.,  7.
Hawes,  Daniel  H.,  Collector  and  Insurance  Agent.     Niagara  Frontier,  132.
Hochstetter,  Albert,  Merchant.     Niagara  Frontier,  132.
Holmes,  J.  W.,  Foreman  Oar  Shop.  S.  W.,  Niagara  Frontier,  132  ;  Ames
chap.,  88 ;  Bruce  coun.,  15.
Howard,  Hiram  M.,  Locomotive  Engineer.  Niagara  Frontier,  132  ;  Ames
chap.,  88 ;  Genesee  com.,  10.
Johnson,  F.  H.,  Proprietor  Cave  of  the  Winds  at  the  Falls.  Initiated  ax.
5817  ;  Chaplain,  Niagara  Frontier,  132  ;  Ames  chap.,  88  ;  Genesee  com.,  10.
Munn,  0.  L.,  Goat  Island  Toll  Gate.  Secretary,  Niagara  Frontier,  132  ;
Ames  chap.,  88.
Murdock,  John  F.,  Postmaster.     Niagara  Frontier,  132.
Neilson,  H.,  Liquors,  Groceries,  Provisions,  etc.  Niagara  Frontier,  132 ;
Ames  chap.,  88.
Niagara  Frontier  Lodge,  132,  was  chartered  June  10th,  a.l.  5848.  -Regular
meetings,  first  and  third  Wednesdays.
Pierce,  John,  Groceries  and  Provisions.    Niagara  Frontier,  132.
Sheldon,  H.  H.,  Attorney  at  Law.  P.  M.,  Niagara.  Frontier,  132  ;  Ames
chap.,  88 ;  Lake  Erie  com.,  20.
Sloan,  F.  A.,  Clerk,  International  House.     Keystone,  235.
Thomas,  Ambrose,  Physician  and  Surgeon.  Initiated  a.l.  5816 ;  P.  M.,
Niagara  Frontier,  132  ;  Ames  chap.,  88.
Waddell,  James,  Merchant  Tailor.  J.  D.,  Niagara  Frontier,  132 ;  Ames
chap.,  88.
White,  Samuel  L.,  Machinist.   W.  M.,  Niagara  Frontier,  132  ;  Ames  chap  ,  88.
NINEVEH,  Broome  County.
Guy,  Timothy,  Physician  and  Surgeon.  W.  M.,  Nineveh,  360  ;  C.  H.,  Vallo-
nia  chap.,  162.
NOETH  HOOSICK.
Downer,  A.  H.,  Book-keeper.     Van   Rensselaer,  400 ;    Apollo   chap.,  48 ;
Apollo  com.,  15.
Shrieves,  Thomas,  Farmer.    Van  Rensselaer,  400.
OGDEKSBUEG-,  St.  Lawrence  County.
Bacon,  Fred.  A.,  Attorney  at  Law.     J.  D.,  Ogdensburgh,  128.
Barnes,  R.  M.,  Inspector  of  Customs.     Treasurer,  Ogdensburgh,  128.
Burt,  Charles  S.,  Morocco  Manufacturer.  W.  M.,  Ogdensburgh,  128  ;  P.  Sec-
retary, Ogdensburgh  chap.,  63.
Cummings,  O.  S.,  Machinery  Manufacturer.     Ogdensburgh,  128.
Derby,  T.  N,  General  Traveling  Agent  for  Great  Western  D.  and  M.  Rail-
ways.    Ogdensburgh,  128  ;  Ogdensburgh  chap.,  63.
Dow,  James  M.,  Photographic  Artist.     Ogdensburgh,  128.
Fairchild,  John  H.,  Civil  Engineer  and  Insurance  Agent.  Ogdensburgh,  128  ;
H.  P.,  Ogdensburgh  chap.,  63  ;  Adelphic  coun.,  7  ;  Order  High  Priesthood.
Flagg,  Isaiah  H.,  Grocer.  S.  M.  of  Cer.,  Ogdensburgh,  128  ;  Ogdensburgh
chap.,  63.

--- Sayfa 316 ---
304  world's  masonic  register.
Geer,  C.  P.,  Express  Agent.     Ogdensburgh,  128.
Gilbert,  Silvester,  retired  Merchant  and  Banker.  P.  M.,  Ogdensburgh,  128 ;
P.  H.  P.,  Ogdensburgh  chap.,  63  ;  Knights  Templar.  Initiated  November,
a.l.  5813,  Geneva,  N.  Y. ;  Deputy  Grand  H.  P.,  Grand  Chapter,  N.  Y.
Johnson,  Riley,  Proprietor  Johnson  Hotel.  Ogdensburgh,  128 ;  G.  M.  2d
Veil,  Ogdensburgh  chap.,  63.
Lewis,  N.,  Cabinet  Manufacturer.  Ogdensburgh,  128 ;  Scribe,  Ogdensburgh
chap.,  63.
Mack,  Clothier.     Secretary,  Ogdensburgh,  128.
McDonald,  J.  G.,  Manufacturer,  and  Dealer  in  Coffee,  Spices,  Groceries  and
Provisions,  etc.     Ogdensburgh,  128  ;  Scribe,  Ogdensburgh  chap.,  63.
Northrup,  H.  D.,  Shingle  Manufacturer.     Ogdensburgh,  128.
Partridge,  A.  S.,  Pearl  Barley  Manufacturer.     S.  D.,  Ogdensburgh,  128.
Ransom,  John  D.,  Yankee  Notions,  etc.  P.  M.,  Ogdensburgh,  128 ;  P.  S.,
Ogdensburgh  chap.,  63.
Service,  Samuel,  Architect  and  Builder.  P.  S.  D.,  Ogdensburgh,  128 ;  G.  M.
3d  Veil,  Ogdensburgh  chap.,  63.
Spencer,  James  C,  Attorney  at  Law ;  U.  S.  Attorney  Northern  District  New
York.    Franklin,  216  ;  Ogdensburgh  chap.,  63.
OLEAlf,  Cattaraugus  County.
Barse,  C.  V.  B.,  Hardware,  Nails,  Glass,  etc.    Treasurer,  Olean,  252.
Bennie,  H.  D.,  Grocer.  P.  M.,  Olean,  252 ;  H.  P.,  Olean  chap.,  150 ;  St.
John's  com.,  24.
Bennie,  M.  B.,  Book-keeper  and  Clerk.    J.  W.,  Olean,  252.
Cary,  C.  S.,  Attorney  at  Law.     Olean,  252.
Crocker,  Fred.,  Lumberman.     Olean,  252  ;  G.  M.  3d  Veil,  Olean  chap.,  150.
Pish,  H.  W.,  Postmaster.     Olean,  252.
Homer,  S.  E.,  Bating  Saloon  at  Depot.     Olean,  252  ;  Olean  chap.,  150.
Nason,  Benj.  E.  S.,  Lumberman.     P.  J.  W.,  Olean,  252.
Norton,  Geo.  W.,  Cigar  Manufacturer.     S.  W.,  Qlean,  252.
Russell,  Martin,  Merchant.     P.  M.,  Olean,  252  ;  P.  H.  P.,  Olean  chap.,  150.
Scott,  J.  L.,  Merchant  Tailor.     J.  D.,  Olean,  252.
Shaw,  John  S.,  Agent  N.  Y.  and  E.  Railroad.     Secretary,  Olean,  252.
Wilcox,  Nathan  P.,  Dry  Goods  Merchant.  W.  M.,  Olean,  252  ;  P.  H.  P.,
Olean  chap.,  150  ;  St.  John's  com.,  24.
OSWEGO.
Judd,  B.  Jessie,  Conductor  N.  Y.  and  E.  Railroad.  Friendship,  153 ;  New
Jerusalem  chap.,  47 ;  De  Molay  com.,  22.
Rogers,  Chas.  H.,  Engineer  N.  Y.  and  E.  Railroad.     Friendship,  153.
OWE  GO,  Tioga  County.
Carmichael,  Chas.  S.,  Jeweler.     S.  M.  of  Cer.,  Friendship,  153.
Curtiss,  Allen,  Distiller.     Friendship,  153.
Hoskins,  Watson  L.,  Watches,  Jewelry,  and  Fancy  Goods.  S.  W.,  Friend-
ship, 153 ;  C.  H.,  New  Jerusalem  chap.,  47  ;  Malta  com.,  21.

--- Sayfa 317 ---
NEW    YORK.  305
Hull,  Fred.  K.,  Druggist.  P.  Secretary,  Friendship,  153 ;  New  Jerusalem
chap.,  47.
Johnson,  Horace  P.,  "Wagon  and  Carriage  Manufacturer.  S.  D.,  Friendship,
153.
Paige,  Thomas  S.,  Dry  Goods  Salesman.  Secretary,  Friendship,  153 ;  P.  S.
W.,  "Wilton,  24,  Minnesota;  B.  A.  C,  New  Jerusalem  chap.,  47.
Saunders,  0.  F.,  Produce  Dealer,  and  Tin  and  Copper  Smith.  P.  J.  "W.,
Friendship,  153 ;  King,  New  Jerusalem  chap.,  47.
Upham,  Joseph  B.,  Salesman  for  Isaac  Hall,  Boot  and  Shoe  Merchant.  P.
Secretary,  Friendship,  153.
"Warren,  Chas.  W.,  Eailroad  Conductor  and  Operative  Mason.  "W.  M.,
Friendship,  153 ;  P.  Scribe,  New  Jerusalem  chap.,  47 ;  Monroe  com.,  12.
"Weiss,  S.  "W.,  Methodist  Episcopal  Minister.     Member,  Carbondale,  249,  Pa.
Willard,  Eobbins  D.,  Proprietor  Ah-wa-ga  House.  P.  S.  W.,  Friendship,
153 ;  P.  Treas.,  New  Jerusalem  chap.,  47.
PAINTED  POST,  Steuben  County.
Edwards,  H.  D.,  Postmaster,  and  Jeweler.  P.  M.,  Montour,  168  ;  C.  H.,
Addison  chap.,  146.
Farwell,  Benj.,  Boot  and  Shoe  Dealer.  P.  M.,  Montour,  168.  Initiated  a.l.
5822.
Gray,  Andrew,  Fanning  Mill  and  Plow  Manufacturer.    J.  D.,  Montour,  168.
Hodgman,  W.  S.,  Manufacturer  and  Dealer  in  Flour,  Plaster,  and  Lumber.
P.  J.  and  S.  "W.,  Montour,  168  ;  G.  M.  2d  Veil,  Addison  chap.,  146.
Eaymond,  J.  0.,  Leather  Manufacturer.  W.  M.,  Montour,  168 ;  Addison
chap.,  146 ;  St.  Omer's  com.,  19.
Shattuck,  A.  L.,  Lumber  Dealer.     Montour,  168.
Wilder,  James  Z.,  Blacksmith.     Tyler,  Montour,  168.
Young,  J.  F.,  Deputy  Postmaster.     Treasurer,  Montour,  168.
PEEKSKILL.
Depew,  George  "W.,  Iron  Works,  Main  St.     Cortlandt,  189.
Frear,  James  M.,  Book-keeper  at  Seabury  &  Sandford's  Iron  Works,  Centre
St.    Cortlandt,  189.
Martin,  J.  G.,  Agent  H.  E.  Eailroad  Office.    Monumental,  374,  Bed  Hook.
PELHAMVILLE.
Case,  John,  Hatter.    Huguenot,  448.
PEITM"  YAM",  Yates  County.
Ayres,  L.  S.,  Postmaster  and  Agent  Fire  and  Life  Insurance  Co.  P.  Sec,
Milo,  108  ;  Penn  Yan  chap.,  100.
Dubell,  Peter,  Boot  and  Shoe  Manufacturer.  J.  W.,  Milo,  108 ;  Penn  Yan
chap.,  100.
Farwell,  A.  T.  and  S.  S.,  Proprietors  Eagle  Hotel.    Milo,  108.
Graham,  Lewis  B.,  County  Clerk.     P.  J.  "W.,  Milo,  108  ;  Penn  Yan  chap.,  100.
Holmes,  Farley,  Contractor.  Milo,  108 ;  P.  Scribe,  Penn  Yan  chap.,  100  ;
Jerusalem  com.,  17.

--- Sayfa 318 ---
306  world's  masonic  register.
Judd,  Charles  G.,  Attorney  at  Law.  Initiated,  April  9th,  a.l.  5847  ;  Exalted,
September  6th,  a.l.  5847 ;  P.  M.,  Milo,  108  ;  Past  H.  P.,  Penn  Yan  chap.,  100;
P.  E.C.,  Jerusalem  com.,  17  ;  P.  G.  G.  of  G.  com.,  N.  Y.;  Eight  Eminent  G.
Commander  of  Knights  Templars,  N.  Y.
Kelly,  Charles,  Saloon-keeper.    Milo,  108.
Letts,  James  M.,  Ambrotype  and  Photographic  Gallery  in  Penn  Yan  and
Dundee.     P.  S.  W.,  Dundee,  123  ;  Elmira  chap.,  42  ;  St.  Omer's  com.,  19.
Lewis,  Judge  John  L.,  Attorney  at  Law.  First  Mason  initiated  in  Milo,  108,
May  1st,  a.l.  5846  ;  Exalted,  February,  a.l.  5847  ;  P.  M.,  Milo,  108  ;  P.  H.  P.,
Penn  Yan  chap.,  100  ;  Past  G.  M.  Grand  Lodge,  N.  Y. ;  P.  G.  High  P.,N.Y;
Past  Grand  Commander,  Jerusalem  com.,  17  ;  P.  G.  Generalissimo,  G.  C,  N.  Y.;
Deputy  Gen.  Grand  H.  P.,  G.  chap.,  U.  S. ;  Emeritus  Lieutenant  Commander
of  Cosmopolitan  Consistory ;  Sovereign  Prince  Eoyal  Secret,  32d.
Long,  Wm.  H.,  Hardware  Dealer.     P.  S.  D.,  Milo,  108.
Miller,  E.  C,  Architect  and  Builder.     S.  M.  of  Ceremonies,  Milo,  108.
Morgan,  James  D.,  Jr.,  Hardware  Dealer.     Milo,  108.
Norris,  James  B.,  Proprietor  Norris  House.     Milo,  108.
Poyneer,  Fred,  Agent  N.  Y.  and  E.  R.  B.  S.  W.,  Milo,  108  ;  Scribe,  Penn
Yan  chap.,  100;  Prelate,  Jerusalem  com.,  17.
Randall,  F.  H.,  Druggist  and  Apothecary.     Acting  Treas.,   Milo,  108
Remer,  William  T.,  Sheriff.  P.  S.  W.,  Milo,  108  ;  Treas.,  Penn  Yan  chap.,
100  ;  Jerusalem  com.,  17.
Van  Norman,  Proprietor  Railroad  House.     P.  M.,  Seneca  Lake,  308.
Woodworth,  Abner,  Agriculturalist.  Initiated  a.l.  5813  ;  P.  S.  "W.,  Milo,
108 ;  Past  K.  and  S.,  Penn  Yan  chap.,  100  ;  Jerusalem  com.,  17.
PHELPS,  Ontario  County.
Bowker,  S.  K,  Carriage  Manufacturer.     S.  M.  of  Ceremonies,  Sincerity,  200.
Brockway,  G.  W.,  Agriculturalist,  Dealer  in  Stock,  etc.     Sincerity,  200.
Carpenter,  C.  H.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.  W.  M.,  Sincerity,  200 ;  Seneca
chap.,  36;  Seneca  com.,  U.  D.
Cline,  W.,  Dry  Goods  and  Groceries.     Sincerity,  200.
Flower,  James  B.,  Farmer  and  Merchant.     Sincerity,  200.
Jones,  William,  Miller.     Sincerity,  200.
Peck,  E.  J.,  Farmer  and  Professor  Union  School.  S.  D.,  Sincerity,  200 ;
Geneva  chap.,  36.
Phelps,  E.  N.,  Editor  and  Publisher  of  Democratic  Star.   S.  W.,  Sincerity,  200.
POET  JEEVIS,  Orange  County.
Bliley,  Stephen,  Track  Master,  N.  Y.  and  E.  R.  R.  S.  D.,  Union,  95  ;  G.  M,
2d  Veil,  Elmira  chap.,  42  ;  Southern  Tier  coun.,  16  ;  J.  W.,  St.  Omer's  com.,  19.
Everitt,  Martin  C,  Merchant.     P.  Secretary,  Port  Jervis,  328.
Ferguson,  Rufus,  Druggist.    W.  M.,  Port  Jervis,  328 ;  Corinthian  chap.,  159.
Finn,  Mathew  J.,  Train  Dispatcher.     Port  Jervis,  328.
Fossard,  George  H.,  M.D.,  Port  Jervis,  328.
Gray,  Charles  B.,  Watchmaker  and  Jeweler.  J.  M.  of  Ceremonies,  Port
Jervis,  328.

--- Sayfa 319 ---
NEW   YORK.  301
Hardenburgh,  Charles,  Physician  and  Druggist.  P.  Secty.,  Port  Jervis,  328 ;
Initiated  a.l:  5826.
Lee,  Philip,  Merchant  Tailor.    J.  D.,  Port  Jervis,  328.
McGinnis,  John  C,  Locomotive  Engineer.  Port  Jervis,  328;  Corinthian
chap.,  159.
Norton,  James  H.,  Editor  Tri  States  Union.    Port  Jervis,  328.
Stewart,  William  H.,  Carriage  Manufacturer.  P.  S.  W.,  Port  Jervis,  328  ;
P.  Scribe,  Corinthian  chap.,  159  ;  Royal  and  S.  Master ;  Palestine  com.,  18.
POTSDAM,  St.  Lawrence  County.
Blaisdell,  Justin  H.,  Grocery  and  Furniture.  P.  M.,  Racket  River,  213  ;  Pt.
P.  S.,  St.  Lawrence  chap.,  24.
Cole,  Gideon  T.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.  Racket  River,  213  ;  King,  St.
Lawrence  chap.,  24.
Fugle,  Fred  F.,  Proprietor  St.  Lawrence  Hotel.  St.  Lawrence,  111 ;  Royal
Arch  Mason.
Phelps,  H.  M.,  Marble  Tomb  Stones  &  Monuments.   S.  W.,  Racket  River,  213.
Redway,  H.  N.,  County  Treasurer,  General  Ins.  Agent.  P.  S.  W.,  Racket
River,  213 ;  P.  H.  P.,  St.  Lawrence  chap.,  24.
Sanford,  Joseph  H.,  retired  from  business.  Initiated  a.l.  5824.  P.  M.,
Racket  River,  213 ;  H.  P.,  St.  Lawrence  chap.,  24.
Usher,  Bloomfield,  Jr.,  Banker.  Sec,  Racket  River,  213  ;  Sec,  St.  Law-
rence chap.,  24.
VanAlstine,  C.W.,  Photographer.  Racket  River,  213 ;  St  Lawrence  chap.,  24.
Wadleigh,  G.  S.,  Chair  Manufacturer.     S.  D.,  Racket  River,  213.
Wilson,  E.  B.,  Grocer.    Racket  River,  213.
FOTJGHKEEFSIE.
Camron,  A.,  Carpenter  and  Builder,  South  Hamilton  St.     Poughkeepsie,  266.
Champlain,  Albert  H.,  Teller,  Farmers'  and  Manufacturers'  Bank,  Market
St.    Poughkeepsie,  266.
Fowler,  Sidney,  Gilder,  Water  St.    P.  M.,  Poughkeepsie,  266.
Freeman.  John,  Chairmaker,  South  Water  St.     P.  M.,  Poughkeepsie,  266.
Gausmann,  George,  Masonic  Hall,  Main  St.     P.  M.,  Trinity,  12.
Hitchcock,  J.  C,  Superintendent  of  Poor  of  Dutches  Co.  P.  M.,  Pough-
keepsie, 266.
McLean,  John,  Provision  Store,  241  Main  St.     Poughkeepsie,  266.
Scheckle,  John,  Merchant  Tailor,  341  Main  St.     Poughkeepsie,  266.
Seaman,  James  H.,  Justice  of  Peace  and  Co.  Treas.     Poughkeepsie,  266.
Seines,  George,  Merchant  Tailor,  280  Main  St.     Poughkeepsie,  266.
Shultz,  Simon,  Shoe  Store,  290  Main  St.     Poughkeepsie,  266.
Tallman,  John  P.  H.,  Attorney  and  Banker.     Poughkeepsie,  266.
HHINEBECK.
Judson,  John  D.,  Hardware,  East  Market  St.    Rhinebeck,  432.
Quick,  Smith,  Sash  and  Blind  Maker,  East  Market  St.     P.  M.,  Silentia,  198  ;
W.  M.,  Rhinebeck,  432.
Vankewren,  Hiram  T.,  Liquor  Dealer,  West  Market  St.    Rhinebeck,  432.

--- Sayfa 320 ---
308  world's  masonic  register,
RICHBTJRG,  Allegany  County.
Harris,  Orville,  Hotel-keeper.     Chemung  Valley,  350.
ROCHESTER,  Monroe  County.
Ailing,  William  S.,  Paper  Dealer,  10  and  12  Exchange  St.  Yonnondio,  163  ;
Hamilton  chap.,  62  ;  Eoyal  and  Select  Master  ;  Monroe  com.,  12.
Austin,  Mervin,  Architect,  14  Masonic  Block,  3d  story.  Yonnondio,  163;
Hamilton  chap.,  62.
Bruff,  Wm.  W.,  Druggist,  Exchange  above  Buffalo  St.  W.  M.,  Yonnondio,
163  ;  Hamilton  chap.,  62  ;  Monroe  com.,  12.
Carpenter,  H.  H,  Merchant.     Hamilton  chap.,  62 ;  Monroe  com.,  12.
Gould,  Amos,  Locomotive  Engineer.    Valley,  109.
Hall,  E.  R.,  Agent  for  the  London  Publishing  Co.  Valley,  109  ;  P.  S.,
Hamilton  chap.,  62 ;  Monroe  com.,  12.
Harrison,  Joseph,  Locomotive  Engineer.  Valley,  109  ;  Hamilton  chap.,  62 ;
Monroe  com.,  12.
Lathrop,  William  E.,  Merchant.  P.  M.,  Yonnondio,  163  ;  P.  H.  P.,  Hamilton
chap.,  62  ;  P.  G.  C,  Monroe  encpt.,  12  ;  P.  G.  M.,  Grand  Encpt.
Pellett,  S.  S.,  Ticket  Agent,  New  York  Central  Railroad.  Valley,  109;
Hamilton  chap.,  62  ;  Monroe  com.,  12.
Pickett,  N.  A.,  Wholesale  Dealer  in  Groceries,  Wines,  Liquors,  etc.,  31
Exchange  St.     Valley,  109  ;  Hamilton  chap.,  62  ;  Monroe  com.,  12.
Rapalji,  A.  B.,  Physician  and  Surgeon,  cor.  Main  and  Clinton  Sts.  Yonnon-
dio, 163  ;  Hamilton  chap.,  62  ;  Monroe  com.,  12.
Smith,  E.  Darwin,  Lawyer.  Yonnondio,  163 ;  Hamilton  chap.,  62  ;  Monroe
com.,  12.
Tuller,  Horace,  Dry  Goods  Merchant,  12  State  St.  Yonnondio,  163  ;  King,
Hamilton  chap.,  62  ;  Generalissimo,  Monroe  com.,  12.
RONDOUT.
Coen,  E.  A.,  Engineer  and  Contractor  for  the  Erection  of  Coal  Gas  Works.
Rondout,  343.
McEntree,  C,  Flour  and  Grain  Dealer,  Ferry  St.  W.  M.,  Rondout,  343  ;
Mount  Horeb  chap.,  75.
ROUSE'S  POINT,  Clinton  County.
Barry,  B.  P.,  Station  Agent  N.  N.  Y.  Railroad.     Sec,  Lake,  424.
Colombe,  Ambrose,  Railroad  Conductor.     Steward,  Lake,  424.
Holcomb,  Emmet  T.,  Mercantile  Clerk  and  Deputy  Postmaster.    Lake,  424.
Keef,  Thomas,  Freight  Clerk,  V.  C.  Railroad.  P.  S.  D.,  Columbus,  11,  Ver-
mont.
Milliete,  Joseph,  Jr.,  Merchant.    Treas.,  Lake,  424.
Morgan,  George  W.,  Locomotive  Engineer.     Lake,  424.
Shaw,  James,  Proprietor  Massachusetts  House.     Lake,  424.
Wales,  T.  R.,  Merchant.     W.  M.,  Lake,  424.
Webster,  B.  C,  Proprietor  Webster  House.  Initiated  a.l.  5821 ;  S.  W.,
Lake,  424.

--- Sayfa 321 ---
NEW  YORK.  309
SARATOGA  SPRINGS.
Adams,  J.  W.,  Manufacturer,  and  Wholesale  and  Retail  Dealer  in  Leather,
Oil,  etc.,  208  Broadway.    Rising  Sun,  103.
Benedict,  0.  B.,  Freight  Agent,  Rensselaer  and  Saratoga  Railroad.  Frank-
lin, 90.
Bullard,  Gardner,  Poultry,  Fish,  and  Fruit,  175  Broadway.  Rising  Sun,  103  j
Rising  Sun  chap.,  131.
Burlingame,  Charles  W.,  Agent  National  Ex.  Co.,  150  Broadway.  Rising
Sun,  103.
Chapman,  J.  R.,  Engineer,  Saratoga  and  "Washington  Railroad,  100  Broad-
way.   Apollo,  13  ;  Rising  Sun  chap.,  131.
Durkee,  C.  E.,  Books,  Stationery,  etc.,  124  Broadway.     Rising  Sun,  103.
Fuller,  William  G.,  Proprietor  Columbian  Hotel,  226  and  228  Broadway.
Rising  Sun,  103.
Putnam,  L.  B.,  M.D.,  Druggist,  5  Centre  House.  Rising  Sun,  103 ;  Rising
Sun  chap.,  131.
Rouse,  J.  R.,  Druggist,  138  Broadway.     Rising  Sun,  103.
Tabor,  George  S.,  Builder,  Congress  St.    W.  M.,  Rising  Sun,  103.
SATJGERTIES,  Ulster  County.
Boies,  J.  M.,  Main  St.     Ulster,  193.
Butzel,  John  L.,  Merchant.     Ulster,  193  ;  R.  A.  M.
Winans,  H.,  Attorney  at  Law,  Main  St.     Oasis,  119.
SENECA  FALLS,  Seneca  County.
Cushman,  David,  Foreman  Downs  &  Co.'s  Furnace.     Pocahontas,  211.
Downs,  Abel,  firm  of  Downs  &  Co.,  Manufacturers  of  every  description  of
Suction  and  Force  Pumps,  Garden  Engines,  Skeins  and  Boxes,  Sad  Irons  and
Hardware  generally :  Goffe's  Patent  Knitting  Machines,  American  Lock-stitch
Sewing  Machines.     Pocahontas,  21 L.
Geer,  Thomas,  Moulder  for  Downs  &  Co.     Pocahontas,  211.
Goffe,  A.  J.,  Manufacturer  Knitting  Machines  and  Hosiery.  W.  M.,  Poca-
hontas, 211 ;  P.  H.  P.,  Cohoes  chap.,  168  ;  Order  High  Priesthood;  Salem  Town
com.,  16.
Hall,  Henry  A.,  Track  Master.     Salem  Town,  326.
King,  Wm.  H.,  Broker.  Initiated  a.l.  5815,  in  Sharon  coun.,  member  Poca-
hontas, 211.
Lynn,  John,  Foreman  Island  Manufactory  Rotary  Pumps,  etc.  Pocahontas,
211.
McDonald,  J.  H.,  Dry  Goods  and  Millinery.    Pocahontas,  211.
Moore,  L.  T.,  Foreman  Ornamental  Painter  for  Downs  &  Co.  P.  M.,  Poca-
hontas, 211 ;  C.  H.,  Salem  Town  chap.,  U.  D.
Phillips,  H.  F.,  Foreman  Downs  &  Co.'s  Manufacturing  Establishment.  Senior
M.  of  Ceremonies,  Pocahontas,  211.
Pontius,  Geo.,  Proprietor  American  Hotel,  Agriculturalist  and  Hardware
Dealer.    Pocahontas,  211.
Reed,  Jacob  A.,  Moulder  for  Downs  &  Co.    Pocahontas,  211.

--- Sayfa 322 ---
310  world's  masonic  register.
Reed,  L.  J.,  Clerk  at  Depot  of  N.  Y.  Central  Railroad.     Northfield,  426.
Stowell,  Henry,  Proprietor  and  Publisher  of  Seneca  Palls  Reveille.  Secretary,
Pocahontas,  211.
Stowell,  Perry,  Foreman  Downs  &  Co.'s  Knitting  Machine  Shop.  J.  W.,
Pocahontas,  211 ;  Salem  Town  chap.,  U.  D.
Tyler,  B.  J.,  Miller  and  Distiller.  P.  M.,  Pocahontas,  211 ;  Seneca  chap.,  36 ;
Salem  Town  com.,  16.
Van  Alstine,  E.,  Moulder  for  Downs  &  Co.     Grafton  Lodge,  Til.
Wilcoxen,  G.,  Attorney  at  Law,  Collecting  and  Insurance  Agent.  P.  J.  W.,
Pocahontas,  211.
Williams,  H.  L.,  Foreman  Downs  &  Co.'s  Knitting  Factory.  Pocahontas,
211 ;  Salem  Town  chap.,  U.  D.
SINCLEARVHiLE,  Chautauque  County.
Allen,  C.  J.,  Ex-Senator  State  of  Conn.,  and  Merchant.    P.  M.,  Sylvan,  303.
George,  Isaac,  Universalist  Clergyman.  Forest,  166 ;  Fredonia  chap.,  76  ;
Lake  Erie  com.,  20.
Henderson,  Wm.  W.,  M.D.  and  Druggist.    W.  M.,  Sylvan,  303.
Skinner,  Ebenezer,  Boot  and  Shoe  Manufacturer.  P.  J.  W.,  Sylvan,  303 ;
Royal  Arch  Mason,  Royal  and  S.  Master  and  Knight  Templar.
"Wilson,  C.  S.,  Justice  of  the  Peace  and  Attorney  at  Law.    J.  W.,  Sylvan,  303.
SING  SING.
Johnson,  Wm.  G.,  Butcher.    "Westchester,  180.
O'Brien,  Nicholas,  Jr.,  Hudson  River  Stone  Works.    Westchester,  180.
Perrigo,  Lyman,  Shoemaker.     J.  W.,  Westchester,  180.
Preston,  Job,  Tailor.     Tyler,  Westchester,  180.
Smith,  J.  Malcom,  Justice  of  the  Peace.    P.  M.,  Westchester,  180.
SMITH  VILLE  FLATS,  Chenango  County.
Bailey,  J.  C,  Proprietor  Smithville  Hotel.     Templar,  203.
SUSPENSION  BRIDGE,  Niagara  County.
Brown,  Henry,  Clothing  Merchant.     Niagara  Frontier,  132.
Fridenburgh,  Benj.,  Fancy  Dry  Goods.     Concordia,  143.
Silberberg,  Marcus,  Clothing  Merchant.     Niagara  Frontier,  132.
Skipper,  Geo.,  Locomotive  Engineer.  Senior  M.  of  Ceremonies,  Niagara
Frontier,  132;  Ames  chap.,  88;  Bruce  coun.,  15;  Standard  Bearer,  Genesee
com.,  10.
Yule,  R.,  Telegraph  Operator.     Trent,  39,  Canada  West.
SYRACUSE,  Onondaga  County.
Avery,  Augustus,  371  North  Salina  St.     Central  City,  305.
Baldwin,  Daniel  Pratt,  Law  Student.     Central  City,  305.
Barton,  J.,  Manufacturer,  Importer,  and  Wholesale  Dealer  in  Cigars  and
Tobacco,  78  East  Genesee  St.     Late  Syracuse,  102.
Bigelow,  J.  G.,  Homoeopathic  Physician,  57  Warren  St.     Central  City,  305.
Butler,  John  G.,  Mechanics'  Bank.  Central  City,  305  ;  Syracuse  chap.,  70 ;
Central  City  com.,  25.

--- Sayfa 323 ---
NEW  YORK.  311
Cator,  H.  H.,  Physician,  51  Warren  St.    Central  City,  305  ;  Syracuse  chap.,
70 ;  Central  City  com.,  25.
Crow,  James  M.,  Clerk,  Sherman  House.    Central  City,  305.
Eisner,  Leopold,  M.D.     Syracuse,  501.
Fiske,  W.  B.,  Clothing,  Cloths,  etc.,  17  South  Salina  St.    Central  City,  305.
Fry,  D.  L.,  Piano-forte  Manufacturer,  29  Orange  St.    Late  Syracuse,  102  •
Syracuse  chap.,  70.
Gay,  Calvin  B.,  Dealer  in  Boots  and  Shoes,  1  Washington  Block.-    Central
City,  305  ;  Syracuse  chap.,  70.
Griswold,  D.,  Manufacturer  of  Hats,  Ca*ps,  and  Furs,  22  North  Salina  St.
Central  City,  305.
Hamilton,  William  P.,  19  South  Salina  St.    Central  City,  305 ;   Syracuse
chap.,  70.
Haskins,  H.  B.,  336  North  Salina  St.     Central  City,  305 ;  Syracuse  chap.,  70.
Jacobson,  Israel,  Traveling  Dealer  in  Jewelry,  Watches,  etc.     Cayuga,  221 ;
Syracuse  chap.,  70.
Joy,  Lewis  B.,  Architect  and  Superintendent  of  Buildings,  14  and  15,  third
story,  Dillaye  Buildings.     W.  M.,  Syracuse,  501.
Lamson,  Wm.  P.,  Agent  American  Express  Co.     Central  City,  305 ;  Palmyra
Eagle  chap.,  79;  Central  City  com.,  25.
McDougall,  E.,  Dealer  in  Boots  and  Shoes,  53  North  Salina  St.     Central
City,  305 ;  Syracuse  chap.,  70 ;  Central  City  com.,  25.
Olmsted,  H.  B.,  Saddlery  and  Coach  Hardware,  1  Washington  Stores.     Cen-
tral City,  305 ;  Syracuse  chap.,  70 ;  Central  City  com.,  25.
Palmer,  Manering  C,  Clothier  and  Merchant   Tailor,  17  North  Salina  St.
Late  of  Fort  Brewerton,  256 ;  Syracuse  chap.,  70.
Proctor,  H.  B.,  Watchmaker  and  Jeweler,  14  East  Genesee  St.    Central
City,  305.
Seymour,  Joseph,  Silverware  and  Masonic  Jewels  of  all  kinds.     Central  City,
305 ;  Syracuse  chap.,  70  ;  Central  City  com.,  25.
Stillwell,  H.  W.,  Boots,  Shoes,  Leather,  and  Findings,  30  North  Salina  St..
Central  City,  305 ;  Syracuse  chap.,  70 ;  Central  City  com.,  25.
Thurbur,  Edward,  Manufacturer  of  Bakestuffs  and  Confectionery.     Central
City,  305  ;  Syracuse  chap.,  70  ;  Central  City  com.,  25.
Thurman,  Washington.     Union,  95 ;   Elmira  chap.,  42  ;    S.  W.,  St.  Omer's
com.,  19.
Valintine,  D.,  Watches  and  Jewelry,  21  South  Salina  St.     Central  City,  305.
Van  Slyke,  D.  B.,  M.D.,  Dealer  in  Drugs,  Groceries,  etc.,  23  and  25  North
Salina  St.     Central  City,  305.
Webb,  Wm.  H.,  29  East  Washington  St.     Central  City,  305.
Wood,  B.,  Confectionery  Store,  68  South  Salina  St.     Central  City,  305;
Syracuse  chap.,  70 ;  Central  City  com.,  25.
TAEKYTOWKT.
Brewer,  James  P.,  Builder.     Solomon's,  196.
Chester,  W.  L.,  Clerk.     Solomon's,  196.
Schillinsky,  Gustavus,  Carriage  Trimmer,  etc.     Solomon's,  196.
Taylor,  George  B.,  Lumber  and  Coal  Merchant,  Dobbs's  Ferry.    Solomon's,
196.

--- Sayfa 324 ---
312  world's  masonic  register.
TEOT.
Adams,  Henry  G.,  M.D.,  18  King  St.  Mount  Zion,  311 ;  Apollo  chap.,  48 ;
Apollo  com.,  15.
Arnold,  Oliver  A.,  General  Coal  Dealer,  433  Eiver  St.  Schaghticoke  Pt.
Mount  Zion,  311 ;  Apollo  chap.,  48.
Babcock,  George,  Book-keeper,  Rensselear  Iron  Works.  Mount  Zion,  311 ;
P.  M.,  Franklin,  90;  P.  H.  P.,  Apollo  chap.,  48;  P.  C.  G.,  Apollo  com.,  15.
Ball,  Marcus,  Lawyer,  Museum  Building.  P.  M.,  Mount  Vernon,  311;
Apollo  chap.,  48 ;  Apollo  com.,  15.  *
Banfield,  Robert  P.,  Master  Mechanic,  Rensselaer  Iron  "Works.  Apollo,  13 ;
Apollo  chap.,  48  ;  Apollo  com.,  15.
Bloss,  Richard,  M.D.  P.  M.,  King  Solomon's  Primitive,  91 ;  P.  H.  P.,  Apollo
chap.,  48  ;  P.  0.,  Apollo  com.,  15.
Boutell,  Josiah  W.,  General  Freight  Agent  Troy  and  Boston  Railroad.  King
Solomon's  Primitive,  91 ;  Apollo  chap.,  48  ;  Apollo  com.,  15.
Boutwell,  Oliver,  Proprietor  BoutwelFs  Mill,  River,  near  Rensselaer  St.
King  Solomon's  Primitive,  91.
Bradley,  J.  M.,  Flour  and  Provisions.  139  River  St.  Jerusalem,  355 ;  Phcenix
chap.,  133.
Brandy,  Joseph  P.,  Wines,  etc.,  251  River  St.     Apollo,  13 ;  Apollo  chap.,  48.
Brush,  C.  W.,  5  Fulton  Market.     P.  M.,  Oscar  Coles,  241 ;  Apollo  chap.,  48.
Cornwell,  B.  H.,  Superintendent  Rensselaer  Iron  Works.  St.  Paul's,  124,
Auburn,  N.  Y. ;  Apollo  chap.,  48  ;  Apollo  com.,  15.
Crissey,  Isaac  W.,  Flour  Merchant,  141  River  St.  Mount  Zion,  311 ;  Apollo
chap.,  48.
Deal,  J.  M.,  Car  Builder,  Green  Island.  Apollo,  13;  Apollo  chap.,  48;
Apollo  com.,  15.
Derapsey,  James.  King  Solomon's  Primitive,  91 ;  Apollo  chap.,  48  ;  Apollo
com.,  15.
Gardner,  G.  W.,  Superintendent  Clinton  Foundery.  King  Solomon's  Primi-
tive, 91.
Gregory,  Geo.  G.  King  Solomon's  Primitive,  91 ;  Apollo  chap.,  48 ;  Apollo
com.,  15.
Hogan,  Theodore,  M.D.,  Surgeon  and  Veterinary  Surgeon,  610  River  St.
King  Solomon's  Primitive,  91.
Holden,  Chas.  H.,  Conductor  Rensselaer  and  Saratoga  Railroad,  Mansion
House.     Mount  Zion,  311 ;  Apollo  chap.,  48 ;  Apollo  com.,  15.
House,  Hiram,  Manufacturer  of,  and  Wholesale  Dealer  in,  Shirts  and  Collars,
377  River  St.     W.  M.,  Cambridge  Valley,  481 ;  Apollo  chap.,  48.
Howell,  M.  R.,  Proprietor  Phcenix  Foundery,  543  River  St.  King  Solomon's
Primitive,  91.
Hudson,  James,  Machinist,  541  River  St.     Apollo,  13  ;  Apollo  chap.,  48.
Jackson,  Bradford,  Moulder,  Empire  Works,  181  South  Third  St.  Mount
Zion,  311.
Jones,  David  H.,  Job  Printer,  216  River  St.  King  Solomon's  Primitive,  91 ;
Apollo  chap  ,  48.
Jones,  P.  L.,  Clerk  Police  Court.  Mount  Zion,  311;  Apollo  chap.,  48;
Apollo  com.,  15.

--- Sayfa 325 ---
NEW  YORK.  313
Kemp,  William,  Troy  Brass  Foundery,  29  Third  St.     S.  D.,  King  Solomon's
Primitive,  91 ;  R.  A.  Oapt.,  Apollo  chap.,  48.
Kenyon,  James,  Dealer  in  Wines  and  Liquors,  313  River  St.    Mount  Zion,
311 ;  Glenn's  Palls  chap.,  154.
Kirkpatrick,  S.  B.,  Ornamental  Painter,  Green  Island,  cor.  Canal  and  Hamil-
ton Sts.    Apollo,  13;  Apollo  chap.,  48.
McOafrey,  Wm.  H.,  Conductor  R.  and  S.  Railroad,  Saratoga  Springs.  Mount
Zion,  311.
Moe,  R.  I.,  Transportation  and  Produce  Business,  191  River  St.    Mount
Zion,  311.
Morris,  Robert,  General  Freight  Agent  R.  and  S.  Railroad,  Green  Island.
King  Solomon's  Primitive,  91.
Nutting,  Merritt  M.,  Dealer  in  Agricultural  Implements,  and  Manufacturer
of  Wire  Cloth,  357  and  359  River  St.    Apollo,  13.
Otis,  Geo.  H.,  Accountant,  A.  &  W.  Orr  &  Co.,  State  Dam.     Mount  Zion,
311 ;  Apollo  chap.,  48  ;  Apollo  com.,  15.
Parkman,  Freeman  F.,  Dry  Goods,  15  Museum  Buildings.     Mount  Zion,  311 ;
Apollo  chap.,  48  ;  Apollo  com.,  15.
Powers,  Lyman,  135  Congress  St.     P.  M.,  Apollo,  13 ;  Apollo  com.,  15.
Price,  A.  B.,  Steamboat  Agent,  5  Sixth  St.     King  Solomon's  Primitive,  91.
Schoonmaker,  C.  C,  Ambrotypist  and  Photographist,  282  River  St.    King
Solomon's  Primitive,  91.
Selleck,  H.  K.,  Accountant.     Mount  Zion,  311 ;  Apollo  chap.,  48 ;  Apollo
com.,  15.
Smith,  George  B.,  2  Fulton  Market.    W.  M.,  King  Solomon's  Primitive,  91 ;
Apollo  chap.,  48.
Swett,  George  W.,  Proprietor  Empire  Foundery,  231  Second  St.   King  Solo-
mon's Primitive,  91.
Teson,  Chas.,  Collector  Rensselaer  and  Troy  River  Railroad  Bridge.    W.  M.,
Apollo,  13;  Apollo  chap.,  48.
Thompson,  M.  V.,  Assistant  Superintendent  Albany  Iron  Works.     Apollo,
13  ;  Apollo  chap.,  48.
Tuthill,  D.  W.,  Accountant,  Eaton,  Gilbert  &  Co.'s  Car  Works.    King  Solo-
mon's Primitive,  91 ;  Apollo  chap.,  13.
Warr,  John,  Dealer  in  Fine  Groceries,  278  River  St.    King  Solomon's  Primi-
tive, 91.
White,  Francis  C,  Conductor  Troy  and  B.  Railroad,  Bennington,  Vt.    King
Solomon's  Primitive,  91 ;  Apollo  chap.,  48  ;  Apollo  com.,  15.
White,  J.  T.  B.,  Forwarding  and  Commission  Merchant,  191  River  St.    King
Solomon's  Primitive,  91.
Wilson,  Mordecai  M.,  Druggist,  321  River  St.    Mount  Zion,  311.
Wolf,  T.  T.,  Manufacturer  and  Dealer  in  Stoves,  Hollow  Ware,  etc.,  275
River  St.    Mount  Zion,  311.
Woodworth,  Thos.  J.,  Gilder,  270  River  St.    Apollo,  13.
TTWADILLA  FOKKS.
Hopkins,  0.  S.<  Fur  Dealer.    Floral,  260,  Ohio.

--- Sayfa 326 ---
314  world's  masonic  register.
VENICE,  Cayuga  County.
Fordice,  Benj.  A.,  M.D.     Cayuga,  221.
WATEEPOKD.
Higgins,  John,  Druggist  and  Apothecary,  67  Broad  St.  P.  M.,  Clinton,
140  ;  Cohoes  chap.,  168.
Van  Hoevenburgh,  D.  M.,  Teller  Saratoga  Co.  Bank.  W.  M.,  Clinton,  140 ;
Cohoes  chap.,  168.
WATERLOO,  Seneca  County.
Fillingham,  Tom,  Woolen  Manufacturer.  Secretary,  Seneca,  113;  Salem
Town  chap.,  U.  D.
Lany,  Enos,  Foreman  Weaving  Shop  in  Woolen  Factory.    Seneca,  13.
Marshall,  Henry,  Woolen  Manufacturer.  Seneca,  113 ;  Salem  Town  chap.,
U.  D.
Marshall,  Wm.,  Woolen  Manufacturer.     Seneca,  113.
McLean,  Wm.  T.,  Lumber  Manufacturer.     S.  W.,  Seneca,  113.
O'Neil,  John,  Steam  Bakery,  Confectionery,  and  Manufacturer  Fire  Works.
Seneca,  113.
Beid,  A;  C,  Groceries  and  Provisions.     Seneca,  113.
Wells,  S.  B.,  M.D.  and  Druggist,  and  Bookseller.  W.  M.,  Seneca,  113;
Geneva  chap.,  36  ;  Monroe  com.,  12.
WATEETOWN.
Van  Brakle,  Charles  H.  J.  D.,  Watertown,  49  ;  Secretary,  Watertown  chap.,
59  ;  Recorder,  Watertown  com.,  11 ;  New  York,  L.  0.  P.,  1. ;  New  York,  C.  P.
of  J.,  1.
WATKHTS,  Schuyler  County.
Dey,  David,  P.,  Captain  Steamer  Ben  Loder,  on  Seneca  Lake.  Ark,  33;
Geneva  chap.,  36.
Evans,  Thomas,  Hardware  Merchant.  Junior  M.  of  Ceremonies,  Jefferson,  332.
Freer,  Geo.  G.,  Attorney  and  Horticulturalist.    Jefferson,  332.
Hastings,  M.  A.,  Merchant  Tailor.     Jefferson,  332.
Hudson,  Lemuel,  Physician  and  Surgeon,  and  Deputy  U.  S.  Marshal.  Ini-
tiated a.l.  5815 ;  Exalted  a.l.  5816  ;  P.  M.,  Jefferson,  332  ;  Elmira  chap.,  42.
Seymour,  H.  B.,  Hardware  Merchant.     J.  W.,  Jefferson,  332.
Thompson,  Samuel  H,  Builder.     P.  S.  W.,  Jefferson,  332.
Tompkins,  Edwin  D.,  Merchant.     Secretary,  Jefferson,  332.
WAVEELT,  Tioga  County.
Burdick,  W.  S.,  Watch-maker  and  Jeweler.     Waverly,  407.
Coley,  James  M.,  Baptist  Clergyman  and  Druggist.     Waverly,  407;  New
Jerusalem  chap.,  47.
Hubbert,  H.  C,  Justice  of  the  Peace.     Secretary,  Waverly,  407.
Jarvis,  A.,  Postmaster  and  Beal  Estate  Agent.     Treasurer,  Waverly,  407.
Johnson,  Wm.  E.,  M.D.     Port  Jervis,  328.
Lamphear,  Boot  and  Shoe  Dealer.    Waverly,  407.

--- Sayfa 327 ---
NEW   YORK..  315
Langford,  H.  W.,  Saloon-keeper.    J.  W.,  Waverly,  407.
Lowry,  P.,  Architect  and  Builder.    W.  M.,  "Waverly,  407.
Millspaugh,  Wm.  V.,  Batcher.     P.  Tyler,  Waverly,  407.
Peck,  Wm.,  Proprietor  Waverly  Hotel.     Waverly,  407.
Pierce,  John  H.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.     J.  D.,  Waverly,  407.
Powell,  P.,  Merchant  Tailor.     Union,  108,  Towanda,  Pa.
Powers,  Geo.  H.,  Marble  Manufacturer.     Waverly,  407.
Eichardson,  Lewis,  Eailroad  Conductor  N.  Y.  and  B.  Railroad,  Waverly,  407.
WELLSVILLE  or  GENESEE  STATION,  Allegany  County.
Asher,  John,  Merchant.     Sylvan  Grove,  275.
Coats,  Ambrose  G.,  Lumber  Inspector.  J.  W.,  Scio,  230  ;  C.  H.,  Wellsville
chap.,  143.
Parnum,  C.  L.,  Dry  Goods,  Groceries,  etc.  W.  M.,  Scio,  230 ;  Wellsville
chap.,  143 ;  Eoyal  and  S.  Master ;  G.,  St.  John's  com.,  24.
Purple,  Lucius  M.,  Clinton  Hotel.     Scio,  230;  Wellsville  chap.,  143.
Taggart,  Geo.  L.     Scio,  230.
Talcott,  H.  P.,  Postmaster.  P.  Secretary,  Scio,  230 ;  P.  H.  P.,  Wellsville
chap.,  143;  Eoyal  and  S.  Master;  St.  John's  com.,  24.
Warren,  Geo.  M.,  Boot  and  Shoe  Dealer.     Secretary,  Scio,  230.
York,  Hiram,  Dealer  in  Lumber,  Shingles,  etc.  P.  M.,  Scio,  230 ;  H.  P.,
Wellsville  chap.,  143 ;  Eoyal  and  Select  Master ;  E.  C,  St.  John's  com.,  24.
"WEST  DRESDEN,  Yates  County.
Downey,  Eobt.,  Agriculturalist.     Seneca  Lake,  308.
"WESTFIELD,  Chautauque  County.'
Booth,  Thomas,  Boot  and  Shoe  Dealer.     Past  Tyler,  Summit,  219.
Buck,  Edwin,  and  Son,  Grocers  and  Manufacturers  of  Farming  Utensils.
Members,  Summit,  219.
Denison,  E.  W.,  Job  Printer,  News  Agent,  and  Stationer.  W.  M.,  Summit,
219 ;  Deputy  Grand  Lecturer,  N.  Y.
Hall,  Byron,  Flour  and  Produce  Dealer.     Summit,  219.
Hall,  G.  A,  M.D.     S.  W.,  Summit,  219.
Harris,  J.  G.,  Flour  Manufacturer.    Forest,  166 ;  Fredonia  chap.,  76.
Maginnis,  John,  Mercantile  Clerk.     Summit,  219.
Mann,  David,  Postmaster  and  Attorney.  Initiated  a.l.  5821 ;  P.  M.,  Summit,
219 ;  Eoyal  Arch  Mason.
Patchen,  A.,  Manufacturer  of  Mowing  and  Eeaping  Machines.    Summit,  219.
Thompson,  C.  A.,  Surgeon  Dentist.     Summit,  219.
Young,  Z.  C,  Attorney  at  Law.     Summit,  219  ;  Fredonia  chap.,  76.
"WINDSOR,  Broome  County.
Dusenbury,  Whitmore,  Merchant.    W.  M.,  Windsor,  442 ;  Vallonia  chap.,  162.
21

--- Sayfa 328 ---
316  world's  masonic  register.
THE  COURTESY  OF  MASONRY.
Lodge,  No.  227,  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ireland,  was
attached,  by  a  traveling  warrant  which  had  been  granted  in  the  year  1752.  to
the  46th  Regiment  of  the  British  army,  while  serving  in  America  during  the  war
of  the  Revolution.  The  Lodge  chest,  at  one  time,  says  the  London  Freemasons'
Review,  "  fell  into  the  hands  of  the  Americans  ;  they  reported  the  circumstance
to  General  Washington,  who  embraced  the  opportunity  of  testifying  his  estima-
tion of  Masonry  in  the  most  marked  and  gratifying  manner,  by  directing  that  a
guard  of  honor,  under  a  distinguished  officer,  should  take  charge  of  the  chest,
with  many  articles  of  value  belonging  to  the  46th,  and  return  them  to  the  regi-
ment. The  surprise,  the  feeling  of  both  officers  and  men,  may  be  imagined,
when  they  perceived  the  flag  of  truce  that  announced  this  elegant  compliment
from  their  noble  opponent,  but  still  more  noble  brother.  The  guard  of  honor,
with  their  flutes  playing  a  sacred  march  ;  the  chest,  containing  the  Constitution
and  implements  of  the  Craft,  borne  aloft,  like  another  ark  of  the  covenant,
equally  by  Englishmen  and  Americans,  who,  lately  engaged  in  the  strife  of  war,
now  marched  through  the  enfiladed  ranks  of  the  gallant  regiment  that,  with
presented  arms  and  colors,  hailed  the  glorious  act  by  cheers,  which  the  senti-
ment rendered  sacred  as  the  hallelujahs  of  an  angel's  song."
A  similar  courtesy  was  extended  to  this  Lodge  on  another  and  subsequent
occasion.  In  the  year  1805,  while  in  the  island  of  Dominica,  the  46th  Regiment
was  attacked  by  a  French  force,  war  at  that  time  existing  between  the  govern-
ments of  France  and  Great  Britain,  and  again  the  Lodge  had  the  misfortune  to
lose  its  chest,  which  was  carried  on  board  the  French  fleet,  its  captors  having
had  no  opportunity  of  discovering  the  nature  of  its  contents.  But,  three  years
afterward,  when  the  character  of  the  prize  had  become  known,  the  French
government,  at  the  earnest  request  of  the  officers  who  had  commanded  the  ex-
pedition, returned  the  chest,  with  several  complimentary  presents,  as  a  tribute
from  an  enlightened  nation  to  the  excellence  and  sacred  character  of  the
Masonic  institution.
In  1834,  the  warrant  of  constitution  of  this  Lodge  was  renewed  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Ireland,  on  which  occasion  these  interesting  incidents  in  its  history
were  elicited  from  the  records.
Of  the  ultimate  fate  of  a  Lodge  whose  vicissitudes  in  war  form  so  interesting
a  portion  of  the  annals  of  Freemasonry,  it  is  fortunate  that  we  can  furnish  the
history.  The  Lodge  became  again  dormant,  but  was  revived  on  the  28th  of
March,  1848,  and  established  permanently,  in  Montreal,  as  "  The  Lodge  of  Social
and  Military  Virtues,  No.  227,"  on  the  registry  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ireland.
In  1779,  His  Royal  Highness,  Omdit-ul-Omrah  Bahauder,  eldest  son  of  the
Nabob  of  the  Carnatic,  was  initiated  into  the  Masonic  Order,  in  the  Lodge  at
Trinchinopoly,  near  Madras.

--- Sayfa 329 ---
NORTH  CAROLINA.
GRAND  LODGE.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  North  Carolina  was  organized  January  14th,  5771.
Its  Annual  Communications  are  held  in  the  City  of  Raleigh,  commencing  on
the  first  Monday  in  December.  Its  membership  is  composed  of  the  Grand
Officers,  Past  Grand  Masters,  Past  Grand  Wardens,  Past  Grand  Treasurers
and  Secretaries,  and  the  Masters  and  "Wardens  of  its  constituent  Lodges.
The  revenue  of  the  Grand  Lodge  is  derived  from  the  following  sources  : —
For  a  Dispensation  for  a  new  Lodge        .        .         .  $5  00
For  a  Charter,  in  addition
10  00
For  Diplomas    50
Each  Lodge,  annually
15  00
There  were  133  subordinate  Lodges  in  this  jurisdiction  at  its  Annual  Convo-
cation, in  December,  5859.    Only  117  Lodges  made  returns,  as  follows:  Number
of  members,  5742  ;  Initiations,  445 ;  Affiliations,  86  ;  Dimissions,  200  ;  Deaths,
105  ;  Suspensions,  25  ;  Expulsions,  18  ;  Grand  Lodge  dues,  $1762  75.
The  Officers  for  the  present  Masonic  year  are  as  follows  : —
Lewis  S.  "Williams,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
E.  "W.  Ward,  E.  "W.  Deputy  Grand  Master.
H.  C.  Lucas,  E.  "W.  Senior  Grand  "Warden.
E.  F.  "Watson,  R.  W.  Junior  Grand  Warden.
C.  W.  D.  Hotchings,  E.  W.  Grand  Treasurer.
Wm.  T.  Bain,  R.  W.  Grand  Secretary.
Rev.  Jno.  F.  Speight,  W.  Grand  Chaplain.
James  M.  Wynn,  Senior  Grand  Deacon.
R.  T.  Hall,  Junior  Grand  Deacon.
M.  L.  "Wriston,  Grand  Marshal.
R.  W.  Best,  Grand  Sword  Bearer.
Ellis  Malone,  Grand  Pursuivant.
B.  F.  Benton,  Grand  Tyler.
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.
No.      Lodge.  Location.
1  St.  John's,  "Wilmington.
2  Royal  White  Hart,  Halifax.
3  St.  John's,  Newbern.
5  Charity,  "Windsor.
7  Unanimity,  Edenton.
Time  of  Meeting.
Last  Thursday.
1st  Saturday.
2d  Wednesday.
2d  Monday.
3d  Monday.
O.  L.  Fillyaw.
Jas.  M.  Grizzard.
Chas.  C.  Clark.
Wm.  P.  Gurley.
Wm.  E.  Skinner.
(317)

--- Sayfa 330 ---
318
world's  masonic  register.
No.
Lodge.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
8  Phoenix,  Fayetteville.
17  Ameri'n  George,  Murfreesboro'.
31  Phalanx,  Charlotte.
32  Stokes,  Concord.
37  Wm.  R.  Davie,  Lexington.
40  Hiram,  Raleigh.
45  Liberty,  Wilkesboro'.
56  King  Solomon,  Jackson.
58  Concord,  Tarboro'.
69  Perseverance,  Plymouth.
64  Kilwinning,  Wadesboro'.
71  Eagle,  Hillsboro'.
75  Widow's  Son,  Camden.
76  Greensboro',  Greensboro'.
78  Sharon,  Greenville.
81  Zion,  Trenton.
82  Mount  Moriah,  Statesville.
83  Lafayette,  Jacksonville.
84  Fellowship,  Smithfield.
85  Morning  Star,  Nashville.
88  Enfield,  Enfield.
90  Skewaikee,  Williamston.
91  Western  Star,  Rutherfordton.
92  Joseph  Warren,  Stantonsburg.
95  Jerusalem,  Hookerton.
96  St.  John's,
97  Wake  Forest,
98  Hiram,
99  Fulton,
101  Warren,
102  Columbus,
103  Pasquotank,
104  Orr,
106  Perquimons,
107  Clinton,
108  Belmont,
109  Franklin,
110  St.  John's,
111  Wentworth,
112  Wayne,
113  Person,
114  St.  Alban's,
115  Holly  Springs,
116  Germanton,
117  Mount  Lebanon.Wilson.
118  Mount  Hermon,  Asheville.
121  Logan,  Jamestown.
122  Tuscarora,  Oxford.
123  Franklinton,        Franklinton.
Kinston.
Dunnsville.
Clinton.
Salisbury.
Kenansville.
Pittsboro'.
Elizabeth  City.
Washington.
Hertford.
Yanceyville.
Bear  Swamp.
Beaufort.
Smithville.
Wentworth.
Everettsville.
Roxboro'.
Lumberton.
Holly  Springs.
Germanton.
1st  Saturday.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
Last  Friday.
1st  .Friday.
3d  Monday.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Tuesday.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
1st  Friday.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Friday.
3d  Saturday.
2d  Friday.
2d  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
4th  Saturday.
1st  Mon.  &  3d  Sat.
2d  Monday.
1st  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
2d  Wednesday.
2d  Saturday.
3d  Friday.
1st  Friday.
2d  Friday.
1st  Tuesday,
2d  Thursday.
1st  Sat.  &  2d  Mon.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
.  A.  M.  Campbell.
F.  M.  Capehart.
M.  L.  Wriston.
L.  S.  Bingham.
Geo.  Riley.
W.  D.  Williams.
.  H.  H.  Dent.
Saml.  Calvert.
.  Dr.  B.  W.  Mabrey.
H.  B.  Short.
Eli  F.  KendaU.
J.  M.  Wolfe.
Thos.  Palmer.
J.  F.  Howlett.
S.  E.  Milburn.
J.  M.  F.  Rhodes.
A.  R.  Siminton.
E.  W.  Ward.
R.  D.  Atkinson.
J.  A.  Drake.
H.  Joyner.
.  W.  W.  Ward.
A.  R.  Bryan.
A.  J.  Ellis.
J.  M.  Patrick.
W.  W.  Dunn.
J.  S.  Ray.
S.  B.  Killett.
C.  A.  Henderson.
Henry  Grimes.
J.  W.  Hatch.
R.  R.  Speed.
.  Rev.  E.  Geer.
Wm.  Felton.
John  A.  Graves.
Jas.  R.  Hurst.
2d  &  last  Thursdays.  A.  M.  Guthrie.
2d  Saturdays.  Abram  Lane.
3d  Saturdays.  J.  A.  Bailey.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.  R.  E.  Troy.
1st  Sat.  b.  4th  Sun.  D.  H.  Stevenson.
2d  Saturday.  T.  C.  Davis.
1st  Friday.  J.  Roberts.
Saturday  after  f.  m.  W.  H.  Reece.
1st  &  2d  Mondays.  J.  R.  Fuller.
2d  &  last  Saturdays.  J.  H.  Whitfield.

--- Sayfa 331 ---
NORTH   CAROLINA.
319
No.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
124  Clinton,
125  Mill  Creek,
126  Sunsbury,
127  Blackmer,
128  Hanks,
129  Dan  River,
131  Conoho,
132  Radiance,
133  Alamance,
134  Mocksville,
135  Black  Rock,
136  Leaksville,
137  Lincoln,
138  King  Solomon,
140  Mount  Energy,
141  Carolina,
142  Cane  Creek,
143  Mount  Vernon,
144  Taylor,
145  Junaluska,
146  Cherokee,
147  Palmyra,
149  Adoniram,
150  Pee  Dee,
151  Chalmers,
153  Mount  Carmel,
154  Scotch  Ireland,
155  White  Stone,
156  Rolesville,
157  Mount  Pleasant.
158  Knap  of  Reeds,
159  Rocky  River,
160  Beaumont,
161  Emmaus,
162  Yadkin,
164  Deep  River,
165  Archer,
166  Saint  Paul's,
167  Winston,
168  Pleasant  Hill,
170  Blackmer,
171  Delk,
172  Buffalo,
173  Union,
174  G.  Washington,
175  Pollocksville,
176  Mecklenburg,
177  Marlboro',
178  Siloam,
Louisburg.
Newton  Grove.
Gatesville.
Clark's  Creek.
Franklinsville.
Madison.
Hamilton.
Snow  Hill.
Graham.
Mocksville.
Black  Rock.
Leaksville.
Lincolnton.
Long  Creek.
Tranquillity.
Carolina  College.
Snow  Camp.
Chatham.
Belle  Voir.
Franklin.
Murphy.
Averasboro'.
Young's  |xj  Roads.
Norwood's  Store.
Evan's  Mills.
Scott's  Hill.
Mount  Vernon.
Wakefield.
Rolesville.
Wake,
Knap  of  Reeds.
Mudlick.
Beaumont.
Hadley's  Mills.
Yadkinsville.
Faust's  Mills.
Cruchville.
Beatty's  Bridge.
Winston.
Patterson's  Store.
Reem's  Creek.
Coleraine.
Buffalo.
Kernersville.
Lassitter's  y,  Roads.
Pollocksville.
Mecklenburg.
Marlboro'.
Harrell's  Store.
1st  Thursday.
1st  Monday.
Friday  before  f.  m.
Sat.  before  2d  Sun.
2d  &  4th  Friday.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
1st  Tuesday.
3d  Friday.
Last  Saturday.
1st  Friday.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Friday  aft.  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
Sat.  before  2d  Sun.
1st  Saturday.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
2d  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
Friday  on  or  b.  f.  m
4th  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
Saturday  b.  3d  Sun.
3d  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
Ellis  Malone.
J.  C.  Eason.
Wm.  T.  Parker.
Ed.  J.  Christian.
T.  F.  Coyle.
R.  E.  Weathersbee.
R.  W.  Best.
Wm.  H.  Faucett.
T.  J.  Bryan.
J.  C.  Daniel.
.  Thos.  W.  Field.
Thos.  Darling.
Saml.  H.  Bell.
B.  F.  Bullock.
G.  A.  Smith.
B.  Davidson.
W.  M.  Tally.
T.  B.  Farrar,
Neill  S.  Stewart.
J.  S.  Overby.
J.  R.  Livingston.
R.  A.  Stewart.
J.  M.  Foy.
W.  A.  Luckey.
W.  H.  Hood. .
J.  Robt.  Jeffreys.
Allen  Bailey.
John  Peede.
Dr.  W.  S.  Edwards.
D.  F.  Mclver.
J.  B.  West.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
1st  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Friday  bef.  1st  Sun.
2d  Saturday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  bef.  3d  Sunday.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Wednesday.
4th  Saturday.
Wm.  T.  Robertson.
J.  R.  Hawes.
G.  H.  Renegar.
W.  R.  Denney.
R.  V.  Blackstock.
Rev.  Jas.  Delk.
R.  Mclver.
T.  C.  Ham.
W.  C.  Mason.
0.  S.  Griffrn.
J.  R.  Gillispie.
Owen  Fennell.

--- Sayfa 332 ---
320
world's  MASONIC  REGISTER.
No.         Lodge.
lOOATION.
Time  op  Meeting.
Masteb.
179  Lafayette,
Leasburg.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays. J.  T.  Hambrick.
180  Caldwell,
Chapel  Hill.
3d  Saturday.
J.  B.  McDade.
181  Carthage,
Carthage.
Last  Saturday.
A.  R.  McDonald.
182  Townesville,
Townesville.
3d  Saturday.
J.  R.  Duty.
183  Centre  Grove,
Summerfield.
Fri.-  b.  1st  &  3d  Suns .  R.  K.  Denny.
184  Jordan,
Beynoldson.
4th  Saturday.
J.  M.  H.  Lee.
185  Sandy  Creek,
Laurel.
1st  Saturday.
Daniel  Wester.
186  Pine  Forest,
Harrington's.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays. Dr.  J.  McCormick.
187  Central  Cross,
Peach-Tree  Grove.
2d  Saturday.
A.  Thomas.
188  Balfour,
Ashboro'.
1st  Tuesday.
S.  G.  Worth.
189  Taylorsville,
Taylorsville.
190  Fair  Bluff,
Fair  Bluff.
2d  Saturday.
W.  J.  Stanly.
191  Granite,
Stalling's  Depot.
3d  Saturday.
W.  H.  Tomlinson.
192  Burnsville,
Burnsville.
1st  Thursday.
J.  M.  Broyles.
194  Cape  Fear,
Elizabeth  town.
1st  Monday.
Geo.  Tait.
195  Mount  Olivet,
Brown's  Mills.
196  Falkland,
Falkland.
1st  Saturday.
Dr.  D.  P.  Cutchin.
197  Cherokee,
Grogansville.
2d  Saturday.
J.  W.  May.
198  Carey,
Carey  P.  O.
Sat.  bef.  2d  Sunday .  Jas  E.  Allen.
199  High  Point,
High  Point.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
R.  M.  Jackson.
200  Pisgah,
Hendersonville.
201  Eagle  Rock,
Eagle  Rock.
3d  Saturday.
Ed.  Debnam.
202  Cleaveland,
Shelby.
.  A.  W.  Burton.
203  Koanoke,
Weldon.
1st  Friday.
Jas.  Johnson.
204  Berea,
Berea.
205  Long  Creek,
Hopewell.
206  Mingo,
2  iT  Lebanon,
Sampson.
Whitesville.
Kineon  Barefoot.
4th  Saturday.
S.  B.  Jennings.
208  Mount  Olive,
Mount  Olive.
209  New  Salem,
New  Salem.
GRAND CHAPTER.
The  Grand  Chapter  of  North  Carolina  was  organized  in  February,  5847.  It
was  originally  a  subordinate  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  but  withdrew  in
5857,  and  is  now  an  independent  Grand  Chapter.  At  its  Fourteenth  Annual
Convocation  in  June,  5860,  it  had  30  subordinate  Chapters  under  its  jurisdic-
tion, 13  of  which  made  no  returns.  The  total  number  of  members,  those  mak-
ing no  returns  estimated  from  last  returns,  942.  The  17  Chapters  which  made
returns  show  the  following  work :  Exaltations,  69 ;  Rejections,  3 ;  Withdraw-
als, 14;  Deaths,  11 ;  Expulsions,  4;  Dues  received,  $261.
SUBORDINATE  CHAPTERS.
No.       Name.
1  Concord,
2  Phoenix,
3  Mount  Ararat,
4  Roanoke,
Location.
Wilmington. .
Fayetteville.
Murfreesboro'.
Halifax.
Time  of  Meeting.
1st  Monday.
1st  Tuesday.
3d  Saturday.

--- Sayfa 333 ---
NORTH   CAROLINA.
321
No.     Name.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
5  Concord,
6  Temple,
7  Eureka,
8  Oxford,
9  Warrenton,
10  Raleigh,
11  Lafayette,
12  Conoho,
13  Choraizifl,
14  Cherokee,
17  Union,
18  Gaston,
19  Keystone,
20  Salisbury,
22  Lincoln,
23  Montgomery,
24  Germanton,
25  Asheville,
26  Louisburg,
27  Mount  Lebanon,
28  Graham,
29  Goldsboro',
30  Mount  Vernon,
31  Wadesboro',
32  Davie,
33  Clinton,
Tarboro'.
Windsor.
Newbern.
Oxford.
Warrenton.
Kaleigh.
Hillsboro'.
Hamilton.
Greensboro'.
Hartford.
Bear  Swamp.
Eoxboro'.
Plymouth.
Salisbury.
Lincolnton.
Zion.
Germanton.
Asheville.
Louisburg.
Wilson.
Watsonville.
Goldsboro'.
Greenville.
Wadesboro'.
Mocksville.
Washington.
3d  Saturday.
1st  Wednesday.
2d  Thursday.
3d  Friday.
2d  Monday.
2d  Thursday.
1st  Wednesday.
2d  Tuesday.
1st  Friday.
1st  Friday.
1st  Monday.
GRAND   COUNCIL.
Okganized  June  6,  5860.
The  next  Annual  Convocation  of  the  Grand  Council  will  be  held  in  the  Oity
of  "Wilmington,  during  the  Annual  Convocation  of  the  Grand  Chapter,  in  the
first  week  of  Jane,  5861.
SUBORDINATE   COUNCILS.
No.       Name.
1  Alpha,
2  Adoniram,
Location.
Wadesboro'.
Salisbury.
No.         Name.
3  Greensboro',
4  Wilmington,
Location.
Greensboro'.
Wilmington.
COMMANDERY.
There  is  but  one  Commandery  in  North  Carolina,  Wilmington  Commandery,
No.  1,  located  at  Wilmington.  This  Commandery  was  chartered  January  3,
1851.  It  made  no  returns  to  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the  United  States  at
the  triennial  meeting,  in  September,  1859.

--- Sayfa 334 ---
322  world's  masonic  register.
SUBSCRIBERS'  NAMES.
COLEBAINE.
Pruden,  Kentchen  Taylor,  Farmer.     Delk,  171.
EDGECOMB  COUlfTT.
Savage,  Richard  A.,  Parmer.     Mount  Lebanon,  117.
Worsley,  Edwin  G.,  Farmer.     Concord,  58.
FAYETTEVILLE,  Cumberland  County,
Brandt,  George,  Dry  Goods  Merchant.    Phoenix,  8.
FKAJNTKLINTOM'.
Cole,  D.,  Tobacconist.    Franklinton,  123.
Jeffreys,  L.  A.,  M.D,     P.  M.,  Franklinton,  123  ;  Louisburg  chap.,  26.
HILLSBOBOUGH.
Faucetts,  William,  Cabinet-maker.    Eagle,  71 ;  Lafayette  chap.,  11.
LEASBUBG,  Caswell  County.
Lutterloh,  Osage  M.,  Tobacco  Trader.     Lafayette,  179.
MOHGANTON,  Burke  County.
Happoldt,  John   M.,   M.D.  and  Proprietor  of  Mountain   Hotel.     W.  M.,
Catawba  Valley,  100  ;  Lumberton  chap. ;  Yorkville  coun.
Myers,  Abraham,  Merchant.     P.  M.,  Catawba  Valley,  100.
MUBFBEESBOKO'.
Darden,  Jesse,  Farmer.    American  George,  17.
Ely,  Laurence,  Farmer.    American  George,  17.
Griffith,  Henry,  Farmer.    American  George,  17.
Lee,  Rev.  John  P.,  Farmer.     American  George,  17  ;  Mount  Ararat  chap.,  3.
Moore,  Alfred  W.,  Farmer.     American  George,  17  ;  Mount  Ararat  chap.,  3.
PEE  DEE.
Crump,  Rowland,  Farmer.     Carolina,  141.
Ingram,  Presley  N.,  Farmer.     Carolina,  141.
STOKES  COUNTY.
Hutcherson,  Peter,  County  Trustee  and  Harness-maker.     P.   M.,   Patrick
Henry,  140,  Va.;  Germanton  chap.,  24.
"WHITE  LAKE.
Melvin,  Robert  P.,  Farmer.     Phoenix,  8.
WILMINGTON.
Concord  Chapter,  No.  1.     Charter   dated  June,   1824.     Regular  meetings,
first  Monday  in  each  month.

--- Sayfa 335 ---
NORTH   CAROLINA.  323
Fanning,  Phineas  W.,  Chairman  of  Correspondence  Committee  of  Grand
Lodge  and  Grand  Chapter ;  P.  G.  M.  of  Grand  Lodge ;  P.  G.  H.  P.  of  Grand
Chap,  j  P.  M.,  St.  John's,  1 ;  P.  H.  P.,  Concord  chap.,  1 ;  C.  G.,  Wilmington
com.
Newhoff,  M.,  Merchant.  S.  W.,  St.  John's,  1 ;  G.  M.  2d  Veil,  Grand  Chap.;
E.  A.  C,  Chap.  1.
St.  John's  Lodge,  No.  1,  has  two  Charters  ;  one  dated  January,  1794,  and
one  December,  1801.    Regular  meetings,  last  Thursday  in  each  month.
WHSTTOIT.
Anderson,  John  A.,  Merchant.   American  George,  17  ;  Mount  Ararat  chap.,  3.
Bynum,  William   T.,   Hotel-keeper  and  Parmer.     American    George,  17;
Mount  Ararat  chap.,  3.
Shield,  Eichard  H.,  M.D.     American  George,  17.
PROSELYTISM.
Freemasonry  is  opposed  to  proselytism,  or  the  exercise  of  any  means  having
that  end  in  view.  To  persuade,  to  invite,  or  to  influence  in  any  way  a  person. to
join  our  ranks,  is  directly  contrary  to  our  teachings  and  the  established  laws  of
the  Order.  This  is  done  sometimes,  no  doubt,  from  mistaken  notions  conceived
of  the  design  of  Freemasonry.  Some  weak-minded  zealous  brethren,  believing
from  the  excellence  of  the  teachings  of  the  Order  that  conversion  is  one  of  the
objects  of  Freemasonry,  solicit  such  of  their  acquaintances,  whose  habits  are
irregular,  to  join  the  Institution,  with  the  belief  that  it  will  reclaim  them  and
cause  them  to  be  better  men.  However  praiseworthy  such  motives  are,  and
however  sincere  the  brother  may  be  who  desires  that  his  friend  may  become  a
Mason  in  order  to  effect  his  reformation,  yet  experience  has  proved,  and  the  re-
cords of  every  Masonic  Lodge  show,  that  the  influence  of  our  teachings  are  not
sufficient  to  elevate  the  man  of  low  propensities  and  evil  habits.  Such  is  not
the  design  of  Freemasonry,  and  therefore  does  not  attempt  it;  from  which  the
reasonable  inference  must  be  drawn,  that  according  to  the  Landmark  only  the
good  and  true  must  be  admitted  members.  All  strife,  wrangling,  and  want  of
harmony  among  the  brethren  are  caused  by  the  introduction  of  unsuitable
material  into  the  Order.  The  laws  of  Freemasonry  are  sufficient,  if  rigidly  lived
up  to,  to  preserve  the  Institution  harmonious.  They  provide  that  none  of  the
recommenders  of  an  applicant  shall  be  the  committee  of  investigation.  The
recommenders  of  applicants  are  mostly  friends  to  the  applicant  and  would  be
biased  in  his  favor.  But  the  committee  of  investigation  can  act  with  perfect
liberty  and  without  bias,  if  they  do  their  duty  as  they  ought  to.  Soliciting
membership  is  wrong  in  principle,  and  injurious  to  the  peace  and  harmony  of
the  Order.

--- Sayfa 336 ---
OHIO.
GRAND  LODGE.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  Ohio  was  organized  January  4th,  5808.  This  Grand
Lodge  holds  its  Annual  Communications  in  October.  It  has  no  permanent
place  of  meeting.  Its  Annual  Communication  in  58G1  will  be  held  at  Columbus,
commencing  on  the  fifteenth  day  of  October.  The  Grand  Lodge  consists  of  the
Grand  Officers,  Past  Grand  and  Past  Deputy  Grand  Masters,  and  the  Masters
and  Wardens  of  its  constituent  Lodges.     Its  revenue  is  derived  as  follows  : —
For  Dispensations  or  Warrants  for  a  new  Lodge      .        .  $50  00
For  every  Initiation
2  00
For  each  member      .
25
There  are  295  subordinate  Lodges  in  this  jurisdiction.  Number  of  members,
14,000  ;  Initiated  during  the  year,  1400 ;  Reinstated,  420  ;  Admitted,  380 ;
Withdrawn,  756 ;  Suspended,  23 ;  Suspended  for  non-payment  of  dues,  628 ;
Expelled  for  persistent  non-payment  of  dues,  46  ;  Expelled  for  unmasonic
conduct,  89  ;  Died,  130.  Receipts  for  Dispensations,  $500;  for  Initiations  and
annual  dues,  $5930.     Making  a  total  of  Grand  Lodge  receipts  $6430.
The  officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  for  the  present  year,  elected  October,  5860,
are: —
Hokace  M.  Stokes,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
George  Rex,  R.  W.  Deputy  Grand  Master.
George  Webster,  R.  W.  Senior  Grand  Warden.
Lucian  C.  Jones,  R.  W.  Junior  Grand  Warden.
Flavius  J.  Phillips,  R.  W.  Grand  Treasurer.
John  D.  Caldwell,  R.  W.  Grand  Secretary.
SUBORDINATE   LODGES.
No.
Lodge.
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
Master.
1  American  Union,
2  N.  C.  Harmony,
3  Old  Erie,
4  New  England,
5  Amity,
6  Scioto,
7  Morning  Dawn,
8  Harmony,
9  Mt.  Zion,
1  1  Center  Star,
12  Unity,
13  St.  John,
(324)
Marietta.
Cincinnati.
Warren.
Worthington.
Zanesville.
Chilicothe.
Gallipolis.
Urbana.
Mt.  Vernon.
Granville.
Ravenna.
Dayton.
M.  on  or  pre.  f.  m.
1st  Wednesday.
1st  &  3d  Tu.  of  f.  m.
Wed.  pre.  f.  m.
Friday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Thursday.
Monday  of  f.  m.
Th.  on  or  pre.  f.  m.
1st  Friday.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thomas  F.  Jones.
Daniel  H.  Mears.
Edward  Spear.
George  Taylor.
J.  B.  H.  T.  Bratshaw.
Philip  Klein.
William  Nash.
William  B.  Moore.
John  Adams.
Ralph  Granger,  Jr.
Henry  L.  Day.
John  Mills.

--- Sayfa 337 ---
OHIO.
325
No.           Lome.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
14  Franklin,
Troy.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
James  Nesbitt.
15  Cleveland  City,
Cleveland.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
CharlesA.  Woodward.
16  Belmont,
St.  Clairsville.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wilson  S.  Kennon.
17  Washington,
Hamilton.
1st  Monday.
William  C.  Hunter.
18  Hiram,
Delaware.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Charles  H.  McElroy.
19  Jerusalem,
Hartford.
;  D.  L.  Tracy.
20  Magnolia,
Columbus.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Thomas  Sparrow.
21  W.  Star,
Youngstown.
1st  &  3dFri.  of  f.m .  David  McClelland.
22  Rising  Sun,
Ashtabula.
1st  &  3dTu.  off.  m .  Albert  A.  Strong.
23  Pickaway,
Circleville.
Wed.  pre.  f.  m.
Nathan  T.  Bradford.
24  Warren,
Fiqua.  >
1st  &  3d  Fri.  of  f.  m .  Henry  C.  Landes.
25  Paramuthea,
Athens.
Tuesday  pre.  f.  m.
William  P.  Johnson.
26  Lebanon,
Lebanon.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f  m.
William  Adams.
28  Temple,
Painesville.
2d  &  4th  Thursdays I.  Asa  Childs.
29  Clermont  Social, ,  Williamsburg.
Friday  pre.  f.  m.
E.  Zimmerman.
30  Columbus,
Columbus.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays. Amasa  Jones.
33  Ebenezer,
Wooster.
Wed.  pre.  f.  m.
George  Bex.
35  Mansfield,
Mansfield.
Wed.  pre.  f.  m.
Alexander  Mcllvain.
37  Mt.  Moriah,
Beverly.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
C.  F.  Hayward.
38  Highland,
Hillsboro'.
Thursday  of  f.  m.
N.  H.  Hixon.
40  Northern  Light, Maumee  City.
1st  &  3d  Tu.  of  f.  m. William  Robertson.
43  West  Union,
West  Union.
Friday  of  f.  m.
A.  Mahaffey.
44  Columbia,
Miami.
Monday  b.  f.  m.
William  Nugent.
45  Steubenville,
Steubenville.
1st  Thursday.
James  Elliott.
46  Miami,
Cincinnati.
1st  Tuesday.
George  T.  Jones.
47  Clinton,
Massillou.
1st  Monday.
Thomas  W.  Harvey.
48  Aurora,
Portsmouth.
Monday  pre.  f.  m.
Geo.  Stevenson.
49  Xenia,
Xenia.
Wednesdays.
Lewis  Wright.
50  Science,
Sandusky.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
George  Morton.
52  Wilmington,
Wilmington.
Tuesday  pre.  f.  m.
Wm.  H.  Harrison.
54  Milford,
Milford.
Saturday  pre.  f.  m.
Wm.  Beard.
55  Eastern  Star,
Franklin.
Fri.  on  or  pre.  f.  m.
P.  Schenck.
56  King  Solomon,
Elyria.
M.  on  or  pre.  f.  m.
Heman  Ely.
57  Lancaster,
Lancaster.
M.  on  or  pre.  f.  m.
Virgil  E.  Shaw.
58  Medina,
Medina.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
Alfred  Da-vis.
59  Tuscarawas,
Canal  Dover.
Saturdays.
Samuel  Hammond.
60  Canton,
Canton.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m. Wm.  H.  Burke.
61  Bethel,
Bethel.
Wed.  pre.  f.  m.
George  Winder.
64  Mt.  Vernon,
Norwalk.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m. Horace  Kellogg.
65  New  Lisbon,
New  Lisbon.
.  Joseph  E.  Vance.
66  Cambridge,
Cambridge.
Tuesday  pre.  f.  m.
C.  L.  Madison.
67  Oxford,
Oxford.
Thur.  on  or  b.  f.  m. W.  R.  DeWitt.
70  Marion,
Marion.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Philip  Dombaugh.
71  Union,
Ripley.
Monday  b.  f.  m.
William  L.  Gray.
72  Georgetown,
Georgetown.
Thur.  on  or  b.  f.  m. John  E.  Brose.
73  Temperance,
Sidney.
Thur.  on  or  b.  f.  m. W.  V.  Cowan.
74  Wadsworth  and
Seville,
Seville.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m. L.  B.  Wilcox.
76  Somerset,
Somerset.
Wed.  pre.  f.  m.
George  Brown,  Jr.

--- Sayfa 338 ---
326
world's  masonic  register.
No.         LODQE.
Location.
Tiara  op  Meeting.
Master.
77  Sandusky,
78  Leesburg,
79  Lafayette,
80  Libanus,
81  Lafayette,
82  Bolivar,
83  Akron,
85  Jackson,
87  Salem,
88  King  Hiram,
89  Friendship,
90  Jefferson,
91  Western  Sun,
93  Cbardon,
94  Montgomery,
96  Coshocton,
97  Newark,
98  Minerva,
100  New  Carlisle,
101  Clark,
102  Felicity,
103  Dresden,
104  Tarlton,
105  Moriah,
106  Fellowship,
107  Fayette,
108  Wakatomaka,
109  Batavia,
111  Corinthian,
112  Wood  County,
113  Mechanicsburg,
115  Hanover,
116  Hebron,
118  Malta,
119  Goshen,
120  McMakin,
121  Mercer,
122  Moscow,
123  Phoenix,
124  Carroll,
126  Sparta,
127  Wellington,
131  Vinton,
132  Trowel,
133  Cincinnati,
134  Columbian,
135  Butlerville,
136  Sharon,
137  Harris ville,
Tiffin  City.
Leesburg.
Zanesville.
Lewisburg.
Cincinnati.
Eaton.
Akron.
Brownsville.
New  Salem.
West  Alexandria.
Barnesville.
Middletown.
Wheelersburg.
Chard  on.
Montgomery.
Coshocton.
Newark.
Miamisburg.
New  Carlisle.
Springfield.
Felicity.
Dresden.
Tarlton.
Jacobsburg.
New  Paris.
Washington.
W.  Bedford.
Batavia.
MoConnellsville.
Bowling  Green.
Mechanicsburg.
Loudenville.
Hebron.
Norwich.
Goshen.
Mt.  Healthy.
Mercer.
Moscow.
Perrysburg.
Carrollton.
Millersburg.
Wellington.
Vinton.
Jackson.
Cincinnati.
Cumberland.
Butlerville.
Sharon.
Lodi.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Thursday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tuesday  pre.  f.  m.
Thurs.  pre.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  pre.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wednesday  of  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
Tuesday  of  f.  m.
Friday  pre.  f.  m.
1st  Friday.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
Friday  pre.  f.  m.
Monday  pre.  f.  m.
Thursday  pre.  f.  m.
Friday  pre.  f.  m.
Saturday  pre.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  aft.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  pre.  f.  m.
Tu.  on  or  pre.  f.  m.
W.  on  or  pre.  f.  m.
Tu.  on  or  pre.  f.  m.
Wed.  pre.  f.  m.
Tu.  on  or  pre.  f.  m.
Thur.  pre.  f.  m.
Fri.  on  or  aft.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
Thur.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
Friday  pre.  f.  m.
Tuesday  pre.  f.  m.
Tu.  on  or  pre.  f.  m.
Friday  pre.  f.  m.
Last  Thursday.
Tuesday  of  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
J.  E.  McCormiok.
.  Jonathan  Adams.
R.  H.  Sedwick.
E.  P.  Eversole.
Wm.  C.  Middleton.
Joseph  N.  Pinney.
Lucius  V.  Bierce.
B.  F.  Spence.
Meredith  D.  Brock.
John  S.  Davis.
J.  W.  Warfield.
J.  G.  W.  Ledman.
Geo.  W.  Flanders.
Daniel  Warner,  Jr.
A.  L.  Cosbey.
Wm.  H.  Robinson.
W.  M.  Cunningham.
Charles  R.  Allen.
William  Long.
Harvey  Vinal.
Harvey  Bradley.
W.  C.  R.  Woodruff.
George  F.  Hamlin.
John  A.  Weyer.
Daniel  F.  Woofter.
Joshua  S.  Parrish.
D.  L.  Goff.
James  S.  Reeves.
L.  F.  Dobbs.
A.  L.  Shepherd.
George  H.  Stewart.
Joshua  Josselyn.
George  W.  Allen.
Charles  Thacher.
J.  G.  Shirely.
S.  R.  Mott.
Henry  Walker.
Asher  Cook.
Absalom  Earns.
T.  McG.  Elright.
J.  C.  Lang.
Anselm  T.  Holcomb.
Samuel  Saylor.
Howard  Matthews.
John  Clements.
Hiram  St.  John.
Dennis  S.  Gibbs.
Henry  Ainsworth.

--- Sayfa 339 ---
OHIO.
32T
No.
Lodge.
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
Master.
138  Chandler,
139  Buoyrus,
140  Cheviot,
141  McMillan,
143  Greenville,
144  Toledo,
145  Valley,
147  Dayton,
148  Mt.  Olive.
149  Aberdeen,
150  Buckeye,
151  Ashland,
152  Venus,
153  Farmers',
154  Latham,
155  Cynthia.
156  Hebardsville,
157  Philodorian,
158  Palestine,
159  Camden,
160  New  Vienna,
161  MadEiver,
162  Teatman,
163  Waynesville,
164  Pomeroy,
165  Hildreth,
166  Russelville,
167  Hamer,
168  Covington,
169  Lithopolis,
170  Thrall,
171  Mingo,
172  Doric,
174  Tippecanoe,
175  Lone  Star,
176  Warpole,
177  N.Philadelphia,
178  Lynchburg,
179  Superior,
180  Wellsville,
181  Bridgeport,
182  Smithfield,
184  Irville,
185  Perry,
186  Springdale,
187  Star,
189  Monroe,
190  Eoscoe,
191  Blanchester,
London.
Bucyrus.
Cheviot.
Cincinnati.
Greenville.
Toledo.
Malta.
Dayton.
Chesterfield.
Aberdeen.
New  Richmond.
Ashland.  -
Mansfield.
Fredonia.
Kenton.
Cincinnati.
Hebardsville.
Nelsonville.
Marysville.
Camden.
New  Vienna.
W.  Liberty.
Columbia.
Waynesville.
Pomeroy.
Republic.
Russelville.
Wapakonetta.
Covington.
Lithopolis.
Fredericktown.
Logan.
Deavertown.
Hyattsville.
Newcomerstown.
Upper  Sandusky.
,  New  Philadelphia.
Lynchburg.
West  Unity.
Wellsville.
Bridgeport.
Smithfield.
Nashport.
Salem.
Springdale.
Cuyahoga  Falls.
Woodsfield.
Roscoe.
Blanchester.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
Thur.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Last  Wednesday.
1st  &  3d  Tu.  of  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Thursdays.
Wednesday  of  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
Friday  b.  f.  m.
Wednesday  aft.  f.  m.
Tuea.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Friday.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Monday  pre.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Friday  of  full  moon.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Friday  pre.  full  m.
Tuesday  pre.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Wed.  b.  f.m.&2w.  a
Wednesday  of  f.  m.
Friday  b.  f.  moon.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Oliver  P.  Crabb.
Cochran  Fulton.
Wm.  T.  Roller.
Cornelius  Moore.
Moses  Hart.
Alexander  Newcomb.
James  Cornelius.
James  H.  Cushing.
James  Dewees.
H.  L.  Philips.
Watt  McMurchy.
James  McCool.
Milton  Smith.
Wm.  F.  Preston.
W.  H.  Phillips.
Saml.  H.  Ridenour.
C.  L.  Wilson.
Thomas  Shannon.
William  Cartmell.
C.  C.  Walker,  dec'd.
Cbas.  C.  Bowers.
Houston  Crockett.
Richard  Bromley.
Jonas  T.  McKay.
W.  W.  Hurley.
John  S.  Smith.
Peter  L.  Wilson.
Geo.  W.  Andrews.
J.  C.  Langston.
A.  England.
C.  P.  Hill.
Luther  S.  Bort.
Isaac  N.  Cherry.
John  Wiggins.
James  Portmess.
M.  H.  Kirby.
John  H.  Burnhill.
N.  W.  Cummins.
H.  H.  Peppard.
Asa  H.  Battin.
John  Chapman.
R.  M.  Ramsey.
Joseph  Edwards.
James  Boone.
Alfred  Shepherd.
John  Hinde.
John  S.  Way.
Lewis  Demoss.
Wm.  Kelsay.

--- Sayfa 340 ---
world's  masonic  register.
No.       Lodge.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
192  Mystic  Tie,
193  Snow,
194  Fielding,
195  Tu-en-da-wie,
196  Bainbridge,
197  Kreider,
198  Lawrence,
199  Ohio,
200  Venice,
201  Richland,
Urichville.
Harrison.
S.  Charleston.
Defiance.
Bainbridge.
Quincy.
Ironton.
Bladensburg.
Ross  P.  0.
Plymouth.
202  Pt.  Washington,  Pt.  Washington.
203  Marathon,  Marathon.
204  Sharonville,  Sharonville.
205  Lima,  Lima.
206  Mt.  Gilead,  Mt.  Gilead.
207  Delta,  McArthur.
208  Hanselmann,  Cincinnati.
209  Bellefontaine,  Bellefontaine.
210  Olive,  Sarahsville.
211  Rushville,  Rushville.
213  Summit,  Twinsburg.
214  Hope,  Delphos.
215  Collins,  Bryan.
216  Mt.  Pleasant,  Mt.  Pleasant.
217  Social,  Lena,  Allen's  P.
218  Van  Wert,  Van  Wert.
219  Harrison,  Cadiz.
220  Hubbard,  Adamsville.
221  Madison,  West  Jefferson.
222  Evergreen,  Conneaut.
224  Plainfield,  E.  Plainfield  P.  O.
225  Ft.  Stephenson,  Fremont.
226  Mt.  Olivet,  Addison.
227  Findlay,  Findlay.
228  Hamer,  Owensville  P.  O.
229  Iris,  Cleveland.
231  N.  Birmingham,  N.  Birmingham.
0.
232  Lockbourne,
233  Eureka,
234  Meridian,
235  Brown,
236  Winchester,
237  Rubicon,
238  Chester,
239  Erie,
240  Groveport,
241  Celina,
243  BJgelow,
244  Monticello,
Lockbourne.
Washington.
Steubenville.
Minerva.
Scott  P.  0.
Toledo.
Chesterville.
Milan.
Groveport.
Celina.
Cleveland.
Clyde.
1st  &  3d  Mon.  off.  m.
Saturday  af.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Thursdays.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thursdays  of  f.  m.
Monday  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Monday  b.  f.  m.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Friday  of  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
4th  Monday.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Thurs.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b;  f.  m.
Friday  before  f.  m.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Thursday.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  af.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
Friday  b.  f.  m.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Tuesday.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
Friday  b.  f.  m.
Wednesday  af.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
Every  Wednesday.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
John  Milone.
Robert  A.  Keen.
G.  W.  Jones.
Jacob  J.  Greene.
James  M.  Pearce.
John  C.  Ambrose.
John  P.  Merrill.
Eli  Farnham.
Robert  Joyce.
Allen  Gaskill.
Hiram  S.  Reynolds
James  Huston,  Jr.
A.  H.  Smith.
A.  K.  Dunn.
Alex.  Pearce.
M.  J.  Mack.
Benj.  S.  Brown.
E.  M.  Danford.
Sam'l  A.  Andrews.
H.  P.  Wagner.
John  P.  Wyatt.
Geo.  W.  Drake.
Nathan  Jackson.
Robt.  Conn.
W.  S.  Granfell.
A.  C.  Tomlinson.
T.  J.  Stutson.
W.  B.  Chapman.
T.  P.  Latham.
F.  S.  Willmer.
John  Maranda.
D.  M.  Stoughton.
James  F.  South.
George  H.  Burt.
Robert  G.  McLean
W.  R.  Gooderl.
C.  M.  May.
B.  R.  Perdue.
Israel  H.  de  Bruin
H.  L.  Hosmer.
E.  Hyatt.
John  G.  Norton.
Abel  Clark.
Smith  H.  Clark.
Gaston  G.  Allen.
William  E.  Lay.

--- Sayfa 341 ---
OHIO.
329
No.        Lodge.
Location.
245  Golden  Gale,
Chagrin  Falls.
246  Garrettsville,
Garrettsville.
247  E.  Liberty,
E.  Liberty.
248  Fulton,
Delta.
249  Newton,
Newton.
250  New  Lexington ,  New  Lexington.
251  Hazen,
Morristown.
252  Webb,
Stockport.
253  Cumminsville,
Cumminsville.
254  Buford,
Buford.
255  Warsaw,
Warsaw.
256  Napoleon,
Napoleon.
257  Germantown,
Germantown.
258  Emery,
Loveland.
259  Mineral,
Hamden.
260  Floral,
Fitchville.
261  N.  Fairfield,
N.  Fairfield.
262  Napthali,
Carroll.
263  Clarington,
Clarington.
264  Paddy's  Eun,
New  London.
265  Morrow,
Morrow.
266  Meridian  Sun,
Richfield.
267  Bellair,
Bellair.
268  Blazing  Star,
N.  Lewisburg.
269  Mt.  Sterling,
Mount  Sterling.
270  Union  City,
Union  City.
271  Alliance,
Alliance.
272  Arcana,
Crestline.
273  Bellevue,
Bellevue.
274  Village,
Burton.
275  Orphan'sFriend.Wilksville.
276  Allen,
Columbiana.
277  Rock  Creek,
Morgan.
278  Amesville,
Amesville.
279  Central,
Calais.
280  Kalida,
Kalida.
281  Ward,
Piqua.
282  Pleasant  Bidge,  Pleasant  Ridge.
283  Anchor,
Duncan's  Falls.
284  Relief,
Pierpont  Center.
285  Clement  Amitie,  Unionville.
286  Antioch,
Danville.
287  Sylvania,
Sylvania.
288  Fostoria.
Fostoria.
289  Grand  Rapids,
Gilead.
290  Versailles,
Versailles.
291  Licking,
Utica.
292  Boggs,
DeGraff.
293  Bartlett,
Plymouth.
Time  of  Meettoo.  Masteb.
1st  &  3d  Weds.  L.  D.  Mix.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.  Charles  T.  Barton.
1st  &  3d  Weds.  Wm.  T.  Sharp.
1st  &  3d  Weds.  Ootavius  Waters.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.   Wm.  M.  Boughan.
Every  Saturday.        John  H.  Kelly.
Monday  b.  f.  m.         John  M.  Jones.
Every  Saturday.        John  W.  White.
Th.  on  or  af.  f.  m.     A.  De  Sarasay.
Tuesday  off.  m.        Wm.  P.  Thompson.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.  James  G.  Haly.
Wed.  of  or  b.  f.  m.     J.  E.  Donnellan.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.      Isaiah  Ogier.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.         Thomas  Smith.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.  Marcus  Foote.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.    A.  T.  Aldred.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.   John  D.  O'Connor.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.    S.  D.  Lloyd.
Saturday  af.  f.  m.      J.  W.  Stubbs.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.    Hiram  Wheeler.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.      B.  R.  Cowen.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.    H.  D.  Gowey.
Th.  on  or  af.  f.  m.       B.  H.  Moore.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.      John  Buff.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.        Joseph  R.  Conrad.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.       M.  C.  Archer.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.   R.  A.  Severance.
2d  &  4th  Thursdays.  John  Bower.
Friday  before  f.  m.    Royal  C.  Grant.
Friday  before  f.  m.    D.  K.  Bertolette.
1st  &  3d  Weds.  Horace  M.  Root.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.    J.  L.  Brown.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.    L.  F.  Ellsworth.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.       R.  W.  Thrift.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.    J.  F.  McKinney.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.  Stephen  W.  Reeder.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.    D.  H.  Danhauer.
1st  &  3d  Weds.  off.  m.  T.  O.  Bushnell.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.       Jefferson  Shaw.
Tu.  on  or  after  f.  m.  Miner  Hildreth.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.  L.  B.  Lathrop.
  R.  C.  Caples.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.  O.  C.  Carr.
  Thos.  Goodall.
  James  C.  Hemler.
  Wm.  H.  Huston.
  C.  C.  Cheadle.

--- Sayfa 342 ---
330
world's  masonic  register.
Location.  Time  of  Meeting.  Master.
Forestville,  C.  Grove    L.  W.  Bishop.
Ithaca.    J.  H.  Engle.
Parkman.    N.  D.  Smith.
Harpersfield.    H.  W.Stone.
Flushing.    S.  C.  D.  Brock.
Amelia.    F.  M.  Robinson.
Stafford.    G.  W.  Mason.
Birmingham.    G.  M.  Darling.
Willoughby.  2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.    D.  H.  Brinkerhoof.
Richwood.    J.  W.  Sidler.
Monroeville.    Wm.  Benedict.
Port  Jefferson.    Eli  B.  Honnell.
Acadia.    Joseph  Welch.
Centerville.Madison   Perry  Bosworth.
Macksburg.    R.  E.  Smithson.
Frankfort.
Melmore.     J.  M.  Stevens.
Pleasant  Valley   E.  R.  Cook.
Harveysburgh.    T.  M.  Walls.
Sullivan.    H.  P.  Sage.
McCutchensville   Geo.  W.  Sampson.
East  Liverpool.    Joshua  A.  Riddle.
Franklin  Mills.    A.  M.  Sherman.
Manchester.    Jas.  N.  Brittingham.
Greenfield.    Silas  Irion.
Osborn.    Joseph  Baughman.
Tiffin.    Robert  Crum.
Lodges  Chartered  in  October,  1860.
Piketon.    "A.  C.  Davis.
Townsend.    R.  W.  Beckwith.
Clarksville.    G.  W.  Starkey.
Sabina.    Reuben  Newman.
Ottawa.    C.  M.  Godfrey.
Johnstown.    Joseph  Barnum.
Galion.    Joseph  Hildreth.
N.  Bloomfield.    James  Pierson.
Sandusky  City.    Geo.  S.  Patterson.
Bolivar.    Simpson  Harmount.
Cherry  Valley.    .   Moses  Dickinson.
Edenton.    Andrew  Jackson.
294  Forest,
295  Ithaca,
296  W.  Phoenix,
297  Grand- River,
298  Flushing,
299  Amelia,
300  Stafford,
301  Gibson,
302  Willoughby,
303  Mt.  Carmel.
304  Rose,
305  Stokes,
306  Acadia,
307  Lakeshore,
308  Aurelius,
309  Frankfort,
310  Eden,
311  Urania,
312  Harveysburgh,
313  Sullivan,
314  Wyandot,
315  Riddle,
316  Rockton,
317  Manchester,
318  Greenfield,
319  Osborn,
320  Tiffin,
321  Orient,
322  E.  Townsend,
323  Clarksville,
324  Sabina,
325  Ottawa,
326  Center,
327  Fidelity,
328  Rural,
329  Perseverance,
330  Caldwell,
331  Golden  Rule,
332  Edenton,
GRAND  CHAPTER.
Organized  February,  5816.
The  Grand  Chapter  holds  its  Annual  Convocations  at  Columbus,  in  the  second
week  of  October.  It  is  subordinate  to  the  General  Grand  Chapter.  It  has  76
subordinate  Chapters  under  its  jurisdiction;  with  a  total  Membership  of  3060.

--- Sayfa 343 ---
OHIO.
331
According  to  the  published  returns  of  October,  5860,  there  were  60  Suspended
for  non-payment  of  dues,  13  Suspended  for  other  causes,  11  Expelled,  26  Rein-
stated, 99  Withdrawn,  and  26  Died.
SUBORDINATE  CHAPTERS.
No.     Name.
1  Marietta.
2  Cincinnati.
3  Worthington.
4  Chilicothe.
6  Newark.
7  Norwalk.
9  Zanesville.
11  Lancaster.
12  Columbus.
14  Cleveland.
15  Steubenville.
16  Dayton.
17  St.  Clairsville.
18  Massilon.
19  Cincinnati.
20  Circleville.
21  Hamilton.
23  Portsmouth.
24  Troy.
No.     Name.
25  Akron.
26  Mount  Vernon.
27  Wooster.
28  Mansfield.
29  Toledo.
30  Medina.
31  Piqua.
33  Republic.
34  Urbana.
35  Milford.
36  Xenia.
37  McConnellsville.
38  N.  Philadelphia.
39  Athens.
40  Hillsborough.
41  Felicity.
42  Tiffin.
44  Miamisburg.
45  Bryan.
No.      Name.
46  Painesville.
47  Elyria.
48  Springfield.
49  Lima.
62  Georgetown.
53  Cambridge.
54  Delaware.
55  Wellsville.
56  Vinton.
57  N.  Carlisle.
58  Findlay.
59  Gilead.
60  Bellefontaine.
61  Somerset.
62  Marion.
63  Wilmington.
64  Fremont.
65  Ashtabula.
66  Warren.
No.      Name.
67  Ashland.
68  Ironton.
69  Burnesville.
70  Jackson.
71  Van  Wert.
72  Sandusky  City.
73  London.
74  Twinsburg.
75  Logan.
76  Conneaut.
77  Greenville.
78  Moscow.
79  Gallipolis.
80  Pomeroy.
81  Smithfield.
82  Ripley.
83  Alliance.
U.  D.  Canton.
U.  D.  Woodsfield.
[We  have  been  unable,  up  to  the  time  of  going  to  p:
the  Chapters  in  Ohio.    They  are  not  published  in  the
ress,  to  obtain  the  times  of  meeting  and  locations
proceedings  of  the  Grand  Chapter.]
GRAND  COUNCIL.
Organized  5829.
The  Grand  Council  of  Ohio  holds  its  Annual  Communication  on  the  second
Thursday  in  October.  It  has  27  subordinate  Councils  under  its  jurisdiction.
The  returns  at  the  Annual  Communication,  October  11th,  5860,  give  the  follow-
ing: Nnmber  of  members,  773;  Advanced  during  the  year,  81 ;  Withdrawn,  27;
Suspended,  42 ;  Died,  3 ;  Reinstated,  4 ;  Expelled,  5  ;  Total  dues,  $469.
SUBORDINATE  COUNCILS.
No.       Name.
Location.
No.         Name.
Location.
1  Cincinnati,
Cincinnati.
11  Mansfield,
Mansfield.
2  Union,
Steubenville.
12  Zanesville,
Zanesville.
3  Lancaster,
Lancaster.
13  Wooster,
Wooster.
5  Solomon,
Portsmouth.
14  Franklin,
Troy.
7  Bigelow,
Newark.
15  Athens,
Athens.
8  Columbus,
Columbus.
16  Hillsborough,
Hillsborough,
9  Reese,
Dayton.
17  Springfield,
Springfield.
10  Lafayette,
Piqua.
18  Connell,
Felicity.
22

--- Sayfa 344 ---
332
world's
MASONIC  REGISTER.
No.         Name.
Location.
No.      Name.
Location.
19  Hamilton,
Hamilton.
25  Barrere,
Georgetown.
20  Lima,
Lima.
26  Sandusky,
Sandusky.
21  Lebanon,
Lebanon.
31  Reeves,
McConnellaville.
22  Marion,
Marion.
32  Moriah,
Gallipolis.
23  Painesville,
Painesville.
33  Logan,
Bellefontaine.
24  Norwalk,
Norwalk.
GRAND  ENCAMPMENT.
Organized  Octoeee,  1843.
The  Grand  Encampment  of  Ohio  holds  its  Annual  Sessions  in  the  City  of
Columbus,  on  the  second  Thursday  of  October.  It  has  15  subordinate  Encamp-
ments under  its  jurisdiction.  The  returns  of  the  Annual  Session,  October,  1860,
report  817  members.  The  number  of  Sir  Knights  created  during  the  year,  75 ;
Deaths,  5;  Eeceived,  2;  Dimitted,  23;  Suspended,  10;  Expelled,  10;  Dues
paid,  $518.
SUBORDINATE  ENCAMPMENTS.
No.       Namb.
Location.
No.         Name.
Location.
1  Mount  Vernon,
Columbus.
9  De  Molay,
Republic.
2  Lancaster,
Lancaster.
10  Cypress,
Zanesville.
3  Cincinnati,
Cincinnati.
11  Steubenville,
Steubenville.
4  Massillon,
Massillon.
12  Oriental,
Cleveland.
5  Clinton,
Mount  Vernon.
13  Calvary,
Portsmouth.
6  Reed,
Dayton.
14  Shawnee,
Lima.
7  Toledo,
Toledo.
15  Athens,
Athens.
8  Chilicothe,
Chilicothe.
SUBSCRIBERS'  NAMES.
AKRON,  Summit  County.
Akron  Lodge,  83,  was  chartered  October,  a.d.  1841,  a.l.  5841.  Eegular
meetings,  Tuesday  on  or  before  full  moon ;  72  members.
Allen,  Wm.  O,  Assistant  Postmaster  and  Telegraph  Operator.  S.  D.,  Ak-
ron, 83 ;  C.  H.,  Washington  chap.,  25.
Bartges,  S.  W.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.  P.  M.,  Akron,  83 ;  P.  H.  P.,  Wash-
ington chap.,  25.
Bierce,  General  Lucius  V.,  Attorney  at  Law.  Initiated  a.l.  5826,  in  Unity,
30 ;  Past  and  Present  W.  M.,  Akron,  83 ;  P.  H.  P.,  Washington  chap.,  25 ;
Eoyal  and  Select  Master;  Knights  Templar;  P.  G.  Master,  Grand  Lodge.
Collins,  C.  A.,  Carriage  Manufacturer.  S.  W.,  Akron,  83  ;  P.  C.  H.,  Wash-
ington chap.,  25.
Derrig,  James,  Silver  Plater.     Akron,  83.

--- Sayfa 345 ---
ohio.  333
Dussel,  Jacob  B.,  Groceries,  Provisions,  Wines,  etc.     Akron,  83.
Elkins,  R.  S.,  Books,  Stationery,  Drugs,  Medicines,  etc.,  Proprietor  Summit
County  Beacon.     Treas.,  Akron,  83 ;  Washington  chap.,  25.
Hammond,  R.  0.,  Attorney  at  Law  and  Postmaster.     J.  W.,  Akron,  83.
Henry,  R.  P.,  Livery  and  Sale  Stable.     P.  Treas.,  Akron,  83.
Howe,  Richard,  Civil  Engineer.    Akron,  83.
Humphrey,  N.  M.,  Probate  Judge.  P.  J.  W.,  Akron,  83  ;  Scribe,  Washing-
ton chap.,  25.
McMillon,  J.  0.,  Melodeon  and  Piano-forte  Manufacturer.  J.  D.,  Akron,  83 ;
Washington  chap.,  25.
Milligan,  Joseph,  Commission  and  Forwarding  Merchant.  P.  J.  W.,  Akron,
83 ;  G.  M.  2d  Veil,  Washington  chap.,  25.
Nicholson,  Wm.,  Cutter  for  Siesel  Jacobson  &  Co.     Akron,  83.
Robinson,  Stephen,  Cabinet  Turner,  Florist  and  Horticulturalist.  P.  M.,
Akron,  83;  P.  H.  P.,  Washington  chap.,  25;  Order  of  the  High  Priesthood.
Initiated  in  Constellation  Lodge,  Mass.,  a.l.  5827.
Scott,  David  A.,  Blacksmith  and  City  Marshal.  P.  M.,  Cascade,  U.  D. ;  P.
S.  W.,  Akron,  83 ;  King,  Washington  chap.,  25.
Stephens,  J.  W.,  Justice  of  the  Peace.  Initiated  in  Fidelity,  309,  N.  Y.,  a.l.
5823;  P.  S.  W.  and  Secretary,  Akron,  83  ;  P.  Scribe  and  Secretary,  Washing-
ton chap.,  25.
Tallman,  Wm.,  H.,  Watch-maker,  Jewelry,  and  Manufacturer  of  Hair  Jew-
elry.   P.  S.  D.,  Akron,  83  ;  Washington  chap.,  25.
Upington,  Philip,  Saddle  and  Harness.     P.  Treas.,  Akron,  83 ;  Washington
chap.,  25.
Wetmore,  H.  W.,  Stoves,  Tinware,  and  Agricultural  Implements.  Akron, 83.
Wilson,  Sullivan  S.,  County  Treasurer.     Star,  187.
ALLIANCE,  Stark  County.
Conrad,  Joseph  R.,  Agriculturalist,  Atwater,  Portage  County,  Ohio.  W.  M.,
Alliance,  271 ;  H.  P.,  Alliance  cbap.,  83  ;  Sir  Knight;  32d.
Dorman,  Charles  H.,  Locomotive  Engineer.     Alliance,  271.
Dorman,  David,  Locomotive  Engineer.     Alliance,  271.
Filson,  James  M.,  Railroad  Conductor.     Alliance,  271 ;  Alliance  chap.,  83.
Hester,  D.  G.,  Agent  C.  and  P.  Railroad,  and  Insurance  Agent.  Secretary,
Alliance,  271 ;  Secretary,  Alliance  chap.,  83.
Johnson,  Simon,  Agriculturalist,  and  Mayor.     S.  D.,  Alliance,  271.
Nixon,  Wm.  A.,  firm  of  Pettit  &  Nixon,  Commission  Merchants  and  Pro-
duce Dealers.     P.  S.,  Alliance,  271 ;  Treas.,  Alliance  chap.,  83.
Reiter,  Alexander,  Jeweler  and  Watch-maker.  P.  S.  W.,  Wellsville,  180 ;
Member,  Alliance,  271 ;  G.  M.  1st  Veil,  Alliance  chap.,  83.
Shalters,  M.  R.,  Manufacturer  of  Agricultural  Implements.  Alliance,  271 ;
Alliance  chap.,  83.
Sourbeck,  Daniel,  Eating  Saloon  at  Junction  P.  F.  W.  and  C.  Railroad  and
C.  and  P.  Railroad.     Alliance,  271.
Uran,  John,  Fireman.     Tyler,  Alliance,  271.

--- Sayfa 346 ---
334  world's  masonic  register.
ASHTABULA,  Ashtabula  County.
Amsden,  A.  0.,  "Watch-maker  and  Jeweler.     J.  W.,  Eising  Sun,  22.
Dickinson,  G.  W.,  Watch-maker  and  Jeweler.  Secretary,  Eising  Sun,  22 ;
Western  Eeserve  chap.,  65.
Hoyt,  Wm  B.,  Local  Minister,  and  Lumber  Dealer.     Eising  Sun,  22.
Hubbard,  John  C,  Physician  and  Surgeon.     Eising  Sun,  22.
Knapp,  G.  A.,  Copper,  Tin,  and  Sheet-iron  Manufacturer.  S.  W.,  Eising
Sun,  22.
Munn,  Herman  D.,  Carriage  Manufacturer.     Eising  Sun,  22.
Newbery,  Martin,  Druggist.     Rising  Sun,  22.
Patterson,  Geo.  A.,  Boot  and  Shoe  Manufacturer.  Eising  Sun,  22  ;  Nunda
chap.,  155,  N.  Y.
Steele,  A.  W.,  Watch  and  Clock  Maker,  and  Jeweler.  P.  J.  W.,  Rising  Sun,
22  ;  Secretary,  Western  Eeserve  chap.,  65.
Strong,  A.  A.,  Eailroad  Agent.  W.  M.,  Rising  Sun,  22  ;  C.  H.,  Western
Eeserve  chap.,  65.
Warmington,  Robt.  C,  Proprietor  Ashtabula  House.     Rising  Sun,  22.
Wolff,  L.,  Clothing  Merchant.     Cleveland  City,  15;  Mark  Master  Mason.
BELLAIE.
Benson,  James,  Master  of  Ferryboat  "Here  I  Am."    Treasurer,  Bellair,  267.
Bippus,  Christian,  Engineer  of  Car  Factory.     Tyler,  Bellair,  267.
Cowen,  B.  R.,  Clerk  of  House  of  Representatives  of  Ohio.     W.  M.,  Bellair,
267;  St.  Clairsville  chap.,  17;  Zanesville  com.
Richards,  Ambrose,  Carpenter.     S.  D.,  Bellair,  267.
Walker,  N.  B.,  Boot  and  Shoe  Dealer,  Central  Block.     Bellair,  267.
BERLIN  HEIGHTS,  Erie  County.
Tillinghast,  0.  C,  Agriculturalist.     Gibson,  301.
BRIDGEPORT,  Belmont  County.
Branum,  Alex.,  Wholesale  Dealer  in  Groceries,  Dry  Goods,  Hardware,  etc.,
Bank  and  Pike  Sts.    Bridgeport,  181 ;  St.  Clairsville  chap.,  17.
Stewart,  William,  Proprietor  of  Belmont  Planing  and  Saw  Mills,  Lumber
Yard,  etc.    Bridgeport,  181 ;  ,St.  Clairsville  chap.,  17.
CANAL  DOVER,  Tuscarawas  County.
Brisben,  John,  M.D.  and  Druggist.    Tuscarawas,  59.
Conaway,  Henry,  Physician  and  Druggist.     Secretary,  Tuscarawas,  59.
Criswell,  Wm.  H.,  Mercantile  Salesman.  P.  J.  W.  and  Secretary,  Tuscar-
awas, 59  ;  Tuscarawas  chap.,  38.
Haley,  Thomas  J.,  Farmer  and  Stock  Dealer.  P.  M.,  Tuscarawas,  59;  Tus-
carawas chap.,  38.
Hammon,  S.,  Butcher.    W.  M.,  Tuscarawas,  59  ;  Tuscarawas  chap.,  38.
Harmount,  S.,  Merchant.  W.  M.,  Caldwell,  330;  P.  M.,  Tuscarawas,  59;
P.  H.  P.,  Tuscarawas  chap.,  38  ;  Massillon  com.,  4.

--- Sayfa 347 ---
ohio.  335
Hodge,  Wm,  S.,  Mercantile  Salesman.    Tuscarawas,  59.
Newburgh,  J.  W.,  Postmaster  and  Justice  of  the  Peace.  Tuscarawas,  59 ;
Tuscarawas  chap.,  38.
Pech,  Ernst,  Physician  and  Surgeon.    J.  W.,  Caldwell,  330.
Rex,  John,  Tin,  Stoves,  Copperware,  and  Manufacturer  of  Domestic  Wines  of
all  kinds.    Treas.,  Tuscarawas,  59  ;  P.  H.  P.,  Tuscarawas  chap.,  38.
Savell,  James,  Proprietor  Liberty  Hotel.     P.  Treas.,  Tuscarawas,  59.
Selden,  0.  G.,  M.D.  S.  D.,  New  Philadelphia,  177 ;  R.  A.  0.,  Tuscarawas
chap.,  38.
Tuscarawas  Lodge,  59,  meets  every  Saturday.
Walters,  Wm.,  Merchant.    Tuscarawas,  59.
Wilhelmi,  A.,  Attorney,  Justice  of  the  Peace,  and  Notary  Public.  P.  J.  and
S.  W.,  Tuscarawas,  59  ;  P.  H.  P.,  Tuscarawas  chap.,  38.
Williams,  F.  P.,  Stoves,  Tinware,  etc.     New  Philadelphia,  177.
Wilson,  V.  P.,  Editor  and  Publisher.     S.  D.,  Tuscarawas,  59.
Zigler,  Henry,  Attorney  at  Law  and  Postmaster.     Tuscarawas,  59.
CANTON,  Stark  County.
Alexander,  Wm.  H.,  Attorney  at  Law.     S.  D  ,  Canton,  60.
Aultman,  C,  Manufacturer  Agricultural  Machines  and  Buckeye  Mowers.
Canton,  60 ;  Canton  chap.,  U.  D. ;  Massillon  com.,  4.
Beatty,  Samuel,  Sheriff  of  Stark  County.  Canton,  60 ;  Canton  chap.,  U.  D. ;
Massillon  com.,  4.
Burke,  Wm.  H.,  Probate  Judge.  P.  M.,  Clinton,  47 ;  W.  M.,  Canton,  60;
P.  H.  P.,  Hiram  chap.,  18  ;  H.  P.,  Canton  chap.,  U.  D. ;  Order  High  Priest-
hood ;  P.  E.  C,  Massillon  com.,  4.
Deuble,  Geo.,  firm  of  Deuble  &  Bro.,  Watch-makers,  Jewelers,  etc.  Canton,
60.
Evans,  Wm.  P.,  Attorney  at  Law.     P.  M.,  Canton,  60.
Gotthold,  Lewis  E.,  Druggist.  P.  Secretary  and  S.  D.,  Canton,  60 ;  Canton
chap.,  U.  D.
Gottshall,  Daniel,  Justice  of  the  Peace.  P.  M.,  Canton,  60:  initiated  at
Milton,  Northumberland  County,  Pa.,  a.l.  5824 ;  Scribe,  Canton  chap.,  U.  D. ;
Massillon  com.,  4.
Kailey,  John,  Machinist.     Canton,  60.
Leiter,  Benj.  F.,  Attorney  at  Law.     Canton,  60  ;  Canton  chap.,  U.  D.
Meyer,  Herman,  Clothing  Merchant.  P.  J.  W.,  Canton,  60  ;  Canton  chap.,
U.  D.
Oberly,  Christian,  Provisions  and  Saloon.  Canton,  60;  G.  M.  3d  Veil,  Can-
ton chap.,  U.  D.
Ohliger,  Lewis,  Proprietor  Jackson  Hotel.     Canton,  60.
Oliver,  Henry,  Dentist.     Canton,  60.
Raber,  John,  Proprietor  of  Der  Deutsche,  in  Ohio.     Steward,  Canton,  60.
Renner,  Wm.  G.,  News  Agent.     Canton,  60.
Ruhman,  M.,  Clothing  Merchant.    Secretary,  Canton,  60.
Schweitzer,  Conrad,  Hardware  Merchant.     Treasurer,  Canton,  60.
Tinkler,  Chas.  H.,  Butcher.     Canton,  60.
Williard,  J.  G.,  County  Surveyor.  Initiated  in  Columbia,  58,  Md.,  a.l.  5822  ;
King,  Canton  chap.,  U.  D.;  Massillon  com.,  4.

--- Sayfa 348 ---
336  world's  masonic  register.
CINCXBTlirATI.
Alexander,  John,  M.D.,  southwest  cor.  Sixth  St.  and  Broadway.  McMillan,
141.
Avery,  Chas.  T.,  M.D.,  99  West  Seventh  St.     Cincinnati,  133.
Barrett,  E.  D.,  Patent  Steam  Engine  for  Transferring  the  Momentum  of  the
Piston,  42  East  Fifth  St.     N.  C.  Harmony,  2.
Bell,  John  E.,  Deputy  Auditor  Ham.  Co.,  446  West  Seventh  St.  Cynthia,
155 ;  Member  of  the  Lodge,  Chap.,  Conn.,  and  Consistory  of  P.-.  R.\  S.\  32d
degree.
Billiods,  Frederick,  Lafayette  Brewery,  junction  Vine  St.  and  Hamilton  Road.
Cincinnati,  133  ;  McMillan  chap.,  19  ;  Cincinnati  coun.,  1 ;  Cincinnati  encpt.,  3.
Blakemore,  John  R.  S.  W.,  Cincinnati,  133 ;  McMillan  chap.,  19  ;  Cincinnati
coun.,  1.
Bodman,  F.,  Dealer  in  Tobacco  and  Cigars,  270  Main  St.,  between  Sixth  and
Seventh  Sts.  P.  M.,  Cincinnati,  133;  McMillan  chap.,  19  ;  Cincinnati  coun.,  1  ■
Cincinnati  encpt.,  3.
Brannan,  B.  F.,  31  and  33  Pearl  St.     Cincinnati,  133.
Brown,  Charles,  Wholesale  Grocer,  49  West  Second  St.  P.  M.,  Cynthia,
155;  P.  G.  H.  P.,  McMillan  chap.,  19;  Cincinnati  coun.,  1;  Cincinnati  encpt.,  3;
Member  of  the  Lodge,  Chap.,  Coun.,  and  Grand  Consistory,  P.-.  R.\  S.\  32d
degree.
Burckhardt,  Leopold,  Commission  Merchant  and  Manufacturer  of  Lard  Oil
and  Stearine,  103  Sycamore  St.  Cincinnati,  133  ;  Secretary,  McMillan  R.  A.
chap.,  19  ;  Cincinnati  coun.,  1.
Cameron,  Lycurgus,  Miller,  cor.  Western  Road  and  Clark  St.  Secretary,
McMillan,  141 ;  McMillan  chap.,  19  ;  Cincinnati  coun.,  1 ;  Recorder,  Cincinnati
encpt.,  3.
Carson,  Enoch  T.,  Wholesale  and  Retail  Dealer  in  Gas  Fixtures,  Lamps,
Chandeliers,  etc.,  162  Main  St.  P.  M.,  Cynthia,  155  ;  Cincinnati  chap.,  2  ;  Cin-
cinnati coun.,  1 ;  Cincinnati  encpt,  3 ;  K.  T.  G.  Com.  of  the  Sov.  Grand  Con-
sistory of  Ohio,  P.-.  R.\  S.\  32d  degree.  Author  of  a  Monitor  of  the  Ancient
and  Accepted  Rite.
Clarke,  W.  A.,  Publisher,  57  W.  Third  St.     Cynthia,  155.
Cohen,  Wolf,  Wholesale  Clothing,  187  Main  St.  Miami,  46  ;  Cincinnati  chap.,
2  ;  Cincinnati  coun.,  1.
Copelen,  Geo.  W.,  Secretary  Citizens'  Insurance  Co.     Lafayette,  81.
Copelen,  Isaac  C,  President  Citizens'  Insurance  Co.  P.  M.,  N.  C.  Harmony
Lodge,  2  ;  P.  G.  S.  W.  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ohio  ;  P.  T.  I.  of  the  Grand  Coun. ;
P.  D.  G.  M.  of  the  Grand  Encpt.  of  Ohio  ;  Grand  Treas.,  Grand  Coun. ;  Grand
Treas.,  Grand  Chap. ;  Grand  Treas.,  Grand  Encpt. ;  Cincinnati  chap.,  2  ;  Cincin-
nati coun.,  1 ;  Cincinnati  encpt.,  3  ;  Member  of  the  Order  of  High  Priesthood.
Dern,  Geo.  F.,  Printer,  Gazette  Office,  corner  Vine  and  Fourth  Sts.  Cynthia,
155.
Dixon,  George  M.,  Importer  and  Dealer  in  Drugs,  northwest  cor.  Fifth  and
Main  Sts.  Cincinnati,  133  ;  Cincinnati  chap.,  2 ;  Cincinnati  coun.,  1 ;  Cincin-
nati encpt.,  3 ;  Member  of  the  Lodge,  Coun.,  Chap.,  and  Grand  Consistory ;
P.-.  R.\  S.\  32d  degree.

--- Sayfa 349 ---
ohio.  337
Blias,  Henry  P.,  Wholesale  Dealer  in  Watches  and  Jewelry,  also  Manufac-
turer of  Masonic  Lodge,  Chapter,  and  Encampment  Jewels,  Marks,  etc.,  16
West  Fourth  St.  Lafayette,  81 ;  Cincinnati  chap.,  2  ;  Cincinnati  coun.,  1 ;  Cin-
cinnati encpt.,  3.
Ernst,  Jacob,  Bookseller  and  Publisher.  N.  C.  Harmony,  2  ;  McMillan  chap.,
19  ;  Cincinnati  coun.,  1 ;  Prel.,  Cincinnati  encpt.,  3.
Folge.r,  Charles  R.,  Hardware  Manufacturer,  396  Walnut  St.  Secretary,
N.  C.  Harmony.  2.
Frisbie,  John  L.,  Eagle  Steam  and  Gas  Works.  Property  Committee,  N.  C.
Harmony,  2.
Getz,  Geo.  W.,  Book-keeper,  103  Sycamore  St.  Cincinnati,  133.
Graff,  Jacob,  Auctioneer,  18  East  Fourth  St.  P.  M.,  Lafayette,  81 ;  P.  H.  P.,
Cincinnati  chap.,  2 ;  P.  Thr.  111.,  Cincinnati  coun.,  1 ;  P.  G.  H.  P.  of  Grand
Chap. ;  P.  Pr.  of  the  coun.  of  High  Priests  ;  Cincinnati  encpt.,  3  ;  Member  of
Lodge,  Chap.,  Coun.,  and  Grand  Consistory;  P.-.  R.\  S.\  32d  degree.
Greenwood,  Miles,  Eagle  Iron  Works,  cor.  Canal  and  Walnut  Sts.  Cummins-
ville,  253.
Hanselman,  C.  F.,  Justice  of  the  Peace.  P.  M.,  N.  0.  Harmony  and  Hansel-
man  Lodges;  Cincinnati  chap.,  2 ;  Cincinnati  coun.,  1;  Cincinnati  encpt.,  3  ;
P.  D.  G.  H.  P.  G,  Chap  ;  P.  G.  T.  I.  Grand  Master,  Grand  Coun. ;  P.  G,.  M.,  G.
Encampment  of  Ohio ;  P.-.  R.\  S.-.  32d  degree.
Heinsheimer,  Lewis,   Wholesale   Clothing   and   Dry   Goods   Merchant,  125
Walnut  St.     Cincinnati,  133  ;  Gibulum  Lodge  of  Perfection,  and  Dalcho  coun.,
P.  of  J.
Hershberger,  Adam,  Ex-Cash  Collector,  52  E.  Third  St.     Cynthia,  155.
Hill,  Arthur,  Steward  Com.  Hospital,  corner  Twelfth  and  Central  Av.    P.  M.,
Cynthia,  155.
Irwin,  James  T.,  Dentist,  171  Race  St.     S.  D.,  Cincinnati,  133.
Ives,  Henry,  Recorder  Ham.  Co.     Lafayette,  81 ;  McMillan  chap.,  19.
Jackman,  Wm.  Jas.,  Printer,  Gazette  Office,  corner  Vine  and  Fourth  Sts.
Adams,  318,  Bloomsfleld,  Perry  County,  Pa.
Kessler,  Henry,  Sheriff  Ham.  Co.,  Dealer  in  Leather,  Hides,  and  Findings,  215
Maine  St.    Lafayette,  81.
Laird,  John  M.,  Printer,  Gazette  Office,  corner  Vine  and  Fourth  Sts.  Union,
324,  Mifflintown,  Pa.
Lawrie,  Alex.,  Finisher,  Cincinnati  Type  Foundery,  corner  Vine  and  Long-
worth  Sts.    Cynthia,  155.
Lawson,  L.  M.,  M.D.,  office  northwest  cor.  Sixth  and  Walnut  Sts.    McMillan,
141 ;  P.  H.  P.,  McMillan  chap.,  19  ;  Cincinnati  coun.,  1 ;  Encpt.,  3.
Lewis  A.  H.,  Assistant  Supt.  0.  and  M.  Railroad.     McMillan,  141.
Lippincott,  E.,  Paymaster  of  0.  and  M.  Railroad.     McMillan,  141 ;  McMillan
chap.,  19.
Looker,  W.  R.,  Printer,  Gazette  Office,  corner  Vine  and  Fourth  Sts.  La-
fayette, 81.
Lovell,  0.  S.,  Linseed  Oil  Manufacturer  and  Dealer  in  Lard  and  Grease,  38
Lock  St.  Cincinnati,  133 ;  Cincinnati  chap.,  2  ;  Cincinnati  coun.,  1 ;  Cincinnati
encpt.,  3 ;  Member  of  the  Lodge,  Chap.,  Coun.,  and  Grand  Consistory ;  P.-.  R.\  S.- .
32d  degree.

--- Sayfa 350 ---
33S  world's  masonic  register.
Lucky,  N.  P.,  Bricklayer  and  Builder,  121  Laurel  St.  J.  W.,  Cynthia,  155 ;
S.\  P.-.  R.\  S.\  32d  G.  Consistory,  Ohio.
Marshall,  Bobt.  M.,  Printer,  corner  Columbia  and  Vine  Sts.  McMillan,  141 ;
Cincinnati  chap.,  2 ;  Cincinnati  coun.,  1 ;  Gibulum  Lodge  of  Perfection ;  Dalcho
coun.  P.  of  J.
Matthews,  Howard,  Auditor  of  County.  W.  M.,  Cincinnati,  133 ;  P.  H.  P.,
McMillan  chap.,  19 ;  Cincinnati  encpt.,  3  ;  P.-.  R.\  S.\  32d  degree.
McKay,  Geo.,  Brass  Eule  Maker  and  Type  Pounder,  Cincinnati  Type  Foun-
dery,  corner  Vine  and  Longworth  Sts.     Cynthia,  155.
Megrue,  E.  G.,  Chief  Engineer  of  Fire  Department,  corner  Pace  and  Long-
worth  Sts.    McMillan,  141.
Moffett,  James  S.,  Wholesale  Grocer,  70  Walnut  St.  Lafayette,  81 ;  Cincin-
nati E.  A.  chap.,  2  ;  Cincinnati  coun.,  1 ;  Cincinnati  encpt.,  3.
Moore,  Cornelius,  Editor  and  Publisher  of  Masonic  Eeview.  P.  M.,  McMillan,
141 ;  K.  T.
Patterson,  A.,  Stable-keeper,  corner  Congress  and  Lawrence  Sts.  Cynthia,
155.
Peel,  Saml.,  Lumber  Merchant,  corner  Court  and  Elm  Sts. ;  27  Clark  St.
Cynthia,  155  ;  McMillan  chap.,  19  ;  Cincinnati  coun.,  1.
Porter,  Wm.,  Foreman  of  Commercial  Office,  corner  Eace  and  Fourth  Sts.
Late  of  Essex  Lodge,  Salem,  Mass.
Eidenour,  Saml.  H.,  Foreman  Carpenter  and  Joiner,  Cincinnati  Tpye  Foun-
dery,  corner  Vine  and  Longworth  Sts.  W.  M.,  Cynthia,  155;  G.  Tyler,  Lodge
of  Perfection  ;  G.  Tyler,  Dalcho  coun. ;  G.  Chap,  of  Eose  Croix;  G.  Consistory
of  P.-.  of  B.\  S.\  32d.
Eodgers,  W.  G.,  Manufacturer  and  Dealer  in  Ladies'  Fine  Boots,  Shoes,  etc.,
25  E.  Pearl  St.     N.  C.  Harmony,  2.
Scott,  John,  Druggist,  northwest  cor.  Seventh  and  Broadway  Sts.  Treasurer,
McMillan,  141 ;  McMillan  chap.,  19  ;  Cincinnati  coun.,  1 ;  Cincinnati  encpt.,
3;  Member  of  the  Lodge,  Chap.,  Coun.,  and  Grand  Consistory;  P.-.  R.\  S.\
32d  degree.
Shaw,  John,  Carpenter  and  Joiner,  140  Laurel  St.     Cynthia,  155.
Sheldon,  Rev.  H.  O.,  Methodist  Minister.  Mount  Vernon,  64;  Mansfield
coun.,  11.
Shepard,  0.  F.,  Clerk  0.  and  M.  Railroad.  McMillan,  141  ;  Cincinnati  chap.,
2  ;  Cincinnati  coun.,  1.
Slane,  Jackson,  Jewelry  and  Silver  Ware,  6  West  Fourth  St.  Secretary,
Cincinnati,  133;  McMillan  chap.,  19.
Smythe,  Albert  L.,  Book-keeper,  12  Public  Landing.  S.  D.,  Lafayette,  81 ;
Secretary,  Cincinnati  R.  A.  chap.,  2  ;  Cincinnati  coun.,  1.
Smith,  Thos.  Kilby,  Attorney  at  Law,  294  West  Court  St.  Federal,  1,  Wash-
ington, D.  0. ;  Potomac  chap.,  8,  Georgetown,  D.  C. ;  Washington  com.,  1,
D.  C.
Stadler,  Max.,  Wholesale  Clothing  and  Dry  Goods,  etc.,  106  W.  Pearl  St.,
and  117  W.  Third  St.     Lafayette,  81.
Taliaferro,  W.  T.,  M.D.,  office  northwest  cor.  Sixth  and  Walnut  Sts.  Mays-
ville  Lodge  and  Chap.,  Maysville,  Ky.  ;  Cincinnati  coun.,  1.

--- Sayfa 351 ---
ohio.  339
Vatier,  John  L.,  M.D.,  160  Ninth  St.  P.  M.,  McMillan,  141 ;  P.  M.,  La-
fayette, 81 ;  P.  G.  H.  P.,  Cincinnati  chap.,  2  ;  P.  D.  G.  M.  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Ohio ;  P.  G.  M.  of  the  Grand  Encpt.
Warner,  Geo.  K.,  Carpenter  and  Joiner  and  Pipeman  Marion  Fire  Company,
No.  8,  268  Cutter  St.    Cynthia,  155.
Wilson,  John  I).,  Brass  Finisher,  Jones's  House,  Sycamore  St.    McMillan,  141.
Winans,  Isaac  C,  Special  Officer  Police  Court,  573  Sycamore  St.  Cynthia,
155.
Wright,  Gordon  J.,  Manufacturer  and  Dealer  in  all  kinds  of  Cigars,  Snuffs,
Tobacco,  etc.,  375  Western  Row.     Cynthia,  15f>.
Wright,  John,  Clerk  Daily  Times  Office,  394  Fifth  St.     Cynthia,  155.
CIKCLEVILLE,  Pickaway  County.
Bitzer,  C.  S.,  Salesman  for  Wolfleg,  Gregg  &  Shultz.  Pickaway,  23  ;  Circle-
ville  chap.,  20.
Boyer,  John,  Grocer  and  Baker.     Pickaway,  23 ;  Circleville  chap.,  20.
Bradford,  N.  T.,  Canal  Collector.  P.  S.  W.,  Pickaway,  23  ;  Circleville
chap.,  20.
Foreman,  R.  A.,  Farmer  and  Miller.  Pickaway,  23;  Circleville  chap.,  20;
Chilicothe  com.,  8.
Fry,  George,  Proprietor  of  National  House.  Pickaway,  23  ;  Circleville
chap.,  20.
Gregg,  Israel,  Merchant.     Lithopolis,  169  ;  Circleville  chap.,  20.
McPherson,  Wat.  D.,  Books  and  Stationery.     Pickaway,  23.
Olds,  C.  D.,  Dealer  in  Drugs  and  Medicines.  Pickaway,  23  ;  Circleville
chap.,  20.
Wilson,  R.  H.  W.  M.,  Pickaway,  23 ;  P.  K.,  Circleville  chap.,  20 ;  Chili-
cothe com.,  8.
Wright,  Chas.  E.,  Teller  Scioto  Valley  Bank.  Pickaway,  23 ;  Circleville
chap.,  20.
CLEVELAND.
Adams,  Geo.  H,  Sign  and  Ornamental  Painter,  170  Superior  St.  Cleveland
City,  15  ;  Webb  chap.,  14;  Oriental  com.,  12.
Bemis,  Henry  V.,  Commission  Merchant.     Iris,  229 ;  Webb  chap.,  14.
Benton,  Curtis,  Druggist.     P.  M.,  Cleveland  City,  15 ;  Painesville  chap.,  46.
Buhrer,  S.,  Merchant.    Bigelow,  243  ;  Webb  chap.,  14;  Oriental  com.,  12.
Burt,  George  H.,  Bridge  Builder.  Iris,  229  ;  Webb  chap.,  14 ;  Oriental
com.,  12.
Creighton,  R.,  Bookbinder.    Iris,  229;  Webb  chap.,  14  ;  Oriental  com.,  12.
Cunningham,  James  S.,  Agent  for  Liverpool  Packets,  Oviatt's  Building.
Iris,  229 ;  Webb  chap.,  14 ;  Oriental  com.,  12.
Felton,  E.  R.,  Proprietor  of  Commercial  College.  Mount  Vernon,  64 ;  Huron
chap.,  7.
Field,  D.  E.,  Watch-maker  and  Jeweler,  125  Bank  St.  Iris,  229  ;  Webb  chap.,
14 ;  Oriental  com.,  12.
Gale,  C.  C,  Conductor  C.  C.  and  C.  Railroad.     Magnolia,  20.
Hopkins,  James  E.,  Copper-plate  Engraver,  Dealer  in  Gold  Pens,  etc.  Iris,
229;  Webb  chap.,  14;  Oriental  com.,  12.

--- Sayfa 352 ---
340  world's  masonic  register.
Iddings,  Hiram,  Grocery  Merchant.  Iris,  229  ;  Webb  chap.,  14 ;  Oriental
com.,  12.
Johnson,  W.  C,  Foreman  Blacksmith  Shop,  0.  and  P.  Railroad.     Iris,  229.
Main,  0.  E.,  Proprietor  Johnson  House.  Iris,  229  ;  Webb  chap.,  14 ;  Oriental
com.,  12.
Martin,  L.,  Engineer  0.  C.  and  C.  Railroad,  5  Smith  St.     Cleveland  City,  15.
Parker,  M.  C,  Eclectic  Physician  and  Druggist,  50  Public  Square.    Iris,  229.
Ranney,  Henry  C,  Accountant.  W.  M.,  Iris,  229 ;  Webb  chap.,  14 ;  Oriental
com.,  12.
Ross,  Theodore,  Book-keeper,  Weddell  House.  Iris,  229 ;  Webb  chap.,  14 ;
Oriental  com.,  12.
Sherwood,  J.  Q.,  Dry  Goods  Merchant,  242  Superior  St.     Iris,  229.
Skinner,  OrviUe  B.,  Clerk  C.  C.  and  C.  Railroad  Office.  Erie,  161 ;  Buffalo
chap.,  71,  N.  Y.  ;  Oriental  com.,  12.
Stewart,  Graham,  Blacksmith  C.  0.  and  C  Railroad.     Cleveland.  City,  15.
CLYDE.
Bement,  R.  B.,  Oriental  Traveling  Author  and  Lecturer  on  Ancient  History.
Sandusky,  77  ;  Seneca  chap.,  42  ;  Franklin  coun.,  14.
Brown,  Rev.  George  R.,  Universalist  Minister.  Hildreth,  165;  Republic
chap.,  70  ;  De  Molay  encpt.,  9.
Crandall,  NathaD,  Farmer.  Monticello,  244 ;  Fremont  chap.,  64;  Sandusky
City  coun.,  26.
Eaton,  C.  G.,  Practical  Physician..    Monticello,  244;  Fremont  chap.,  64.
Page,  General  Chas.  W.,  Attorney  and  Counselor  at  Law.  Monticello,  244 ;
Huron  chap.,  7  ;  Norwalk  coun.,  24.
CONWEAirT,  Ashtabula  County.
Boughton,  S.  E.,  Railroad  Clerk.     Secretary,  Evergreen,  222.
Burgess,  Otis,  Proprietor  Lake  House,  and  Justice  of  the  Peace.  P.  M.,
Evergreen,  222  ;  H.  P.,  Conneaut  chap.,  76.
Capron,  M.,  Sailor  and  Vessel  Owner.  P.  Treas.,  Evergreen,  222  ;  G.  M.  of
3d  Veil,  Conneaut  chap.,  76.
Carlin,  T.  J.,  Grocer,  and  Postmaster.     P.  M.,  Evergreen,  222.
Chapman,  Wm.  B.,  Attorney  at  Law.    W.  M.,  Evergreen,  222.
Smith,  N.  G.,  Attorney  at  Law  and  Notary  Public.     Evergreen,  222.
CRESTLINE.
Archer,  M.  C,  Check  Clerk  C.  C.  Railroad.  Arcana,  272 ;  Mansfield
chap.,  28.
Champ,  W.  H.,  Saloon-keeper.     Arcana,  272 ;  Mansfield  chap.,  28.
Kernahan,  W.  P.,  Surgeon  and  Physician.  W.  M.,  Arcana,  272 ;  Mansfield
chap.,  28.
McGraw,  John,  Dealer  in  Groceries  and  Provisions.  Arcana,  272 ;  Mansfield
chap.,  28.
Miller,  Chas.  H.,  Freight  Conductor  P.  F.  H.  and  Chicago  Railroad.  Car-
roll, 124.
Ogden,  D.,  Justice  of  the  Peace.     Arcana,  272;  Mansfield  chap.,  28.
Palmer,  John,  Druggist.    Tyler,  Arcana,  272.

--- Sayfa 353 ---
Ohio.  341
DAYTON,  Montgomery  County.
Ayres,  B.  M.,  "Wholesale  Grocer.  P.  M.,  Dayton,  147 ;  Unity  chap.,  16 ;
Eeese  coun.,  9  ;  Eeed  com.,  6.
Olark,  David,  Publisher  and  Proprietor  Dayton  Empire.  P.  M.,  Dayton,  147  ;
Unity  chap.,  16  ;  Eeese  coun.,  9  ;  Eeed  com.,  6.
Dickey,  John  A.,  Book-keeper.  St.  John's,  13 ;  Unity  chap.,  16 ;  Eeese
coun.,  9 ;  Eeed  com.,  6.
Dryden,  Danl.  H.,  County  Auditor.  P.  S.  W.,  St.  John's,  13;  Unity  chap.,
16  ;  Eeese  coun.,  9 ;  Eeed  com.,  6.
Gillespie,  W.  H.,  Furniture  Dealer.  P.  M.,  St.  John's,  13 ;  Unity  chap.,  16 ;
Eeese  coun.,  9  ;  Eeed  com.,  6.
Kiefer,  0.  0..  Salesman  for  Loomis  &  Barnett.  St.  John's,  13 ;  P.  H.  P.,
Unity  chap.,  16  ;  Eeese  coun.,  9  ;  Eeed  com.,  6.
Mills,  John,  Sheriff.  P.  M.,  St.  John's,  13  ;  P.  H.  P.,  Unity  chap.,  16  ;  Eeese
coun.,  9  ;  Eeed  com.,  6.
Shull,  Danl.     St.  John's,  13  ;  Unity  chap.,  16 ;  Eeese  coun.,  9  ;  Eee4  com.,  6.
Sullivan,  S.  M.,  Attorney  and  Notary  Public.  Dayton,  147 ;  Unity  chap.,  16 ;
Eeese  coun.,  9 ;  Eeed  com.,  6.
DELAWARE,  Delaware  County.
Mower,  Eev.  Samuel,  Methodist  Episcopal  Minister.  P.  Chaplain,  Mount
Vernon,  64 ;- P.  Chaplain,  Huron  chap.,  7;  P.  Chaplain,  Norwalk  coun.,  24;
De  Molay,  com.,  9.
EATON,  Preble  County.
Brookins,  John  P.,  M.D.,  Druggist.  P.  M.,  Bolivar,  82  ;  Eaton  chap.,  22  ;
Eeed  com.,  6.
Campbell,  W.  M.,  M.D.  W.  M.,  Bolivar,  82  ;  P.  H.  P.,  Eaton  chap.,  22  ;
Eeed  com.,  6.
Edson,  H.  M.,  Parmer,  (Enterprise  P.  0.)  P.  M.,  King  Hiram,  88  ;  'Eaton
chap.,  22  ;  Eeed  com.,  6.
Larsh,  Thomas  J.,  Civil  Engineer.     Bolivar,  82  ;  P.  H.  P.,  Eaton  chap.,  22.
Pinney,  Joseph  N.     Bolivar,  82  ;  Eaton  chap.,  22  ;  E.  &  S.  M.
ELTEIA.
Bishop,  Peter  A.,  Clerk,  Messrs.  S.  Baldwin,  Laundon  &  Nelson's  General
Store.    E.  A.  Capt.,  Marshall  chap.,  47.
Boynton,  Joshua  E.,  Meat  Market.     King  Solomon's,  56.
Burke,  Stephenson,  Attorney.     King  Solomon's,  56.
Catlin,  W.  C,  Superintendent  of  Schools.     King  Solomon's,  56.
Elder,  M.  A.,  Postmaster.     Master  1st  Veil,  Marshall  chap.,  47.
Hulbert,  J.  W.,  Cashier  Lorain  Bank.  P.  M.,  King  Solomon's,  56  ;  M.  E.
H.  P.,  Marshall  chap.,  47  ;  Oriental  encpt.,  13.
Johnson,  Albert  H.,  Clerk,  Messrs.  Baldwin,  Laundon  &  Nelson's  General
Store.    M.  M.
Maynes,  A.  G.,  Machinist.     King  Solomon's,  56.
Sampsell,  P.  W.,  Physician.    King  Solomon's,  56.

--- Sayfa 354 ---
342  world's  masonic  register.
Starr,  A.  G.,  firm  of  Starr.  Brothers  &  Co.,  General  Store.  Treasurer,  King
Solomon's,  56  ;  Treasurer,  Marshall  chap.,  47 ;  E.  A.  Mason.
Starr,  B.  P.,  firm  of  Starr,  Foote  &  Co.,  General  Store,  Wellington.  Wel-
lington, 127.
Washburn,  George  G.,  Editor  Elyria  Democrat.  Steward,  King  Solomon's,
56.
Woolcott,  S.  B.,  Jeweler.     King  Solomon's,  56.
ELOBEITCE,  Erie  County.
Mason,  John,  Agriculturalist  and  Raiser  of  Fine  Wool  Sheep.  J.  W.,  Gib-
son, 301 ;  Huron  chap.,  7.
FREMONT,  Sandusky  County.
Bartlett,  Brice  J.,  Attorney  at  Law.  Fort  Stephenson,  225  ;  Fremont
chap.,  64.
Canfleld,  Lewis,  Hardware  Merchant.  P.  M.,  Fort  Stephenson,  225  ;  P.  H.  P.
Fremont  chap.,  64 ;  Norwalk  coun.,  24.
Doncyson,  Christian,  Grocer  and  Baker.  Fort  Stephenson,  225  ;  Fremont
chap.,  64.
Ellenwood,  Samuel  M.,  Postmaster.    Fort  Stephenson,  225.
Frentzell,  Frederick,  Saddle  and  Harness  Maker.    Fort  Stephenson,  225.
Green,  John  L  ,  Attorney  at  Law.    Fort  Stephenson,  225.
Gusdorf,  Morris,  Dry  Goods  Merchant.  Fort  Stephenson,  225;  Fremont
chap.,  64.
Hafford,  Eben  F.,  Carriage- maker.  Fort  Stephenson,  225;  Fremont  chap.,
64 ;  Norwalk  coun.,  24.
Sebring,  J.  F.  B.,  Traveling  Agent.  Fort  Stephenson,  225 ;  Past  P.  S.,  Fre-
mont chap.,  64 ;  Norwalk  coun.,  24.
Simpkins,  John  T.,  Assistant  Superintendent.  Fort  Stephenson,  225  ;  Fre-
mont chap.,  64.
Steele,  George  W.,  Express  and  Insurance  Agent.  Fort  Stephenson,  225 ;
Fremont  chap.,  64.
Willmer,  Ferdinand,  Practical  Physician.  Fort  Stephenson,  225 ;  Fremont
chap.,  64.
HAMILTON,  Butler  County.
Erwin,  J.  W.,  Civil  Engineer.  Washington,  17 ;  Hamilton  chap.,  21 ;  Ham-
ilton coun.,  19 ;  Cincinnati  com.,  3.
Gaston,  E.  H.,  County  Treasurer.  Washington,  17 ;  Hamilton  chap.,  21 ;
Hamilton  coun.,  19.
Hunter,  W.  C,  Grocer.  W.  M.,  Washington,  17 ;  Hamilton  chap.,  21 ;  Ham-
ilton coun.,  19 ;  Cincinnati  com.,  3.
Jacobs,  Peter,  Druggist  and  Bookseller.  Washington,  17 ;  Hamilton  chap.,
21 ;  Hamilton  coun.,  19.
Louthan,  George,  retired  from  business.  P.  W.,  Washington,  17 ;  Hamilton
chap.,  21 ;  Hamilton  coun.,  19;  Cincinnati  com.,  3.
Mass,  John,  Merchant  Tailor.  Washington,  17  ;  Hamilton  chap.,  21 ;  Ham-
ilton coun.,  19.

--- Sayfa 355 ---
ohio.  343
Phares,  Wm.  S.,  Deputy  Auditor.  P.  M.,  Washington,  17 ;  P.  H.  P.,  Ham-
ilton chap.,  21 ;  Hamilton  coun.,  19.
Eobertson,  Isaac,  Attorney.  P.  M.,  "Washington,  17  ;  Hamilton  chap.,  21  ;
Hamilton  coun.,  19.
Eothenbush,  C,  Jr.,  Druggist  and  Bookseller.  Washington,  17 ;  Hamilton
chap.,  21.
Snively,  Saml.,  Parmer  and  Flour  Manufacturer.  P.  S.  W.,  Washington,  17;
Hamilton  chap.,  21 ;  Hamilton  coun.,  19.
Troutman,  Jacob,  Postmaster.  Washington,  17  ;  Hamilton  chap.,  21 ;  Ham-
ilton coun.,  19 ;  Cincinnati  com.,  3.
LANCASTEK,  Fairfield  County.
Julian,  Isaac  W.,  Merchant.  Lancaster,  57  ;  Lancaster  chap.,  11 ;  Lancas-
ter coun.,  3 ;  Lancaster  com.,  2.
McClelland,  John,  Dealer  in  Tin  and  Stoves.  P.  M.,  Lancaster,  57  ;  Lancas-
ter chap.,  11 ;  Lancaster  coun.,  3 ;  Lancaster  com.,  2.
McVeigh,  Alfred,  Mayor  and  Attorney.  Lancaster,  57  ;  Lancaster  chap.,
11;  Lancaster  coun.,  3  ;  Lancaster  com.,  2.
Shaw,  Yirgil  E.  W.  M.,  Lancaster,  57 ;  Lancaster  chap.,  11 ;  Lancaster
coun.,  3 ;  Lancaster  com.,  2.
Wohlfort,  R.  W.,  Machinist  and  Engineer.     Lancaster,  57 ;  Lancaster  chap.,
11.
LEBANON,  "Warren  County.
Budd,  Joseph  L.,  Merchant.  Lebanon,  26;  Lebanon  chap.,  5;  Lebanon
coun.,  21.
Drake,  John  R.,  Carriage  and  Wagon  Maker.    Lebanon,  26.
Prank,  Joseph,  Merchant  Tailor.  Lebanon,  26 ;  George  Washington  chap.,
24,  Missouri.
Frost,  G.  W.,  Justice  of  the  Peace,  Attorney,  Notary  Public,  U.  S.  Commis-
sioner Southern  District  of  Ohio.  Lebanon,  26  ;  Lebanon  chap.,  5 ;  Lebanon
coun.,  21.
Glenny,  West,  Druggist.  Lebanon,  26  ;  Lebanon  chap.,  5 ;  Lebanon  coun.,
21 ;  Eeed  com.,  6.
Stokes,  Alfred  E.,  Sheriff.  Lebanon,  26  ;  Lebanon  chap.,  5  ;  Lebanon  coun.,
21;  Reed  com.,  6.
Stokes,  Horace  M.,  Attorney.  G.  M.,  Grand  Lodge ;  P.  M.,  Lebanon,  26 ;
H.  P.,  Lebanon  chap.,  5 ;  Thr.  111.,  Lebanon  coun.,  21;  Reed  com.,  6;  P.  G.  H.
P.,  Grand  Commandery.
Totten,  James  S.  Lebanon,  26  ;  Lebanon  chap.,  5 ;  Lebanon  coun.,  21 ;
Eeed  com.,  6  ;  Ineffable  Mason.
Ward,  Durbin,  Attorney.  Lebanon,  26  ;  Lebanon  chap.,  5 ;  Lebanon  coun.,  21.
LIMA,  Allen  County.
Anderson,  J.  M.,  Merchant.  Lima,  205;  Lima  chap.,  49;  Lima  coun.,  20;
Shawnee  com.,  14.
Bond,  Eli,  Saddle  and  Harness  Maker.  P.  S.  W.,  Lima,  205;  P.  H.  P.,
Lima  chap.,  49 ;  P.  T.  111.,  Lima  coun.,  20 ;  Shawnee  com.,  14.
Cole,  E.  T.,  Grocer  and  Manufacturer  of  Cole's  Chemical  Soap.    Lima,  205.

--- Sayfa 356 ---
344  world's  masonic  register.
Halliday,  C,  Dealer  in  Dry  Goods  and  Groceries.  P.  J.  W.,  Lima,  205 ;  P.
Sec,  Lima  chap.,  49 ;  Lima  coun.,  20 ;  Shawnee  com.,  14.
Hurd,  L.  C,  Attorney  and  Banker.  W.  M.,  Lima,  205 ;  Lima  chap.,  49
Lima  coun.,  20  ;  Shawnee  com.,  14.
Jacobs,  Thos.  K.,  Banker  and  Farmer.  Lima,  205  ;  Lima  chap.,  49  ;  Lima
coun.,  20  ;  Shawnee  com.,  14.
Krebbs,  Eev.  A.  E.,  M.  B.  Minister,  and  Ambrotypist.  Chaplain,  Lima,  205;
Chaplain,  Lima  chap.,  49 ;  Chaplain,  Lima  coun.,  20 ;  Chaplain,  Shawnee
com.,  14.
Overmyer,  G.  W.,  County  Auditor.  Lima,  205 ;  Lima  chap.,  49  ;  Lima  coun.,
20  ;  Shawnee  com.,  14.
Scott,  M.,  Dealer  in  Clothing.  Lima,  205  ;  Lima  chap.,  49 ;  Lima  coun.,  20
Shawnee  com.,  14.
Smith,  A.  N.,  Founder  and  Dealer  in  Stoves  and  Tinware.  P.  M.,  Lima,  205
Lima  chap.,  49 ;  Lima  coun.,  20  ;  Shawnee  com.,  14.
Swaley,  Daniel,  Manufacturer  Sash,  Blind,  Doors,  etc.  P.  M.,  Lima,  205
Lima  chap.,  49  ;  Lima  coun.,  20  ;  Shawnee  com.,  14.
Terrill,  D.  C.  P.,  Dealer  in  Books  and  Stationery,  and  Jeweler.  Lima,  205
Lima  chap.,  49 ;  Lima  coun.,  20  ;  Shawnee  com.,  14.
MANSFIELD,  Kiehmond  County.
Goldsmidt,  Jos.,  Clothing  Merchant.    Venus,  152.
Hickox,  S.  C,  Station  Agent  P.  Ft.  W.  and  C.  Railroad,  and  Agent  Union
Line  Express.     Venus,  152 ;  Mansfield  chap.,  28.
Hickox,  Wm.  S.,  Eailroad  Agent.     Venus,  152  ;  Mansfield  chap.,  28.
Mcllvain,  Alex.,  Plasterer.  W.  M.,  Mansfield,  35;  Mansfield  chap.,  28;
Mansfield  coun.,  11 ;  P.  C,  Clinton  com.,  5.
Meredith,  John,  Probate  Judge.  Mansfield  chap.,  28  ;  Mansfield  coun.,  11 ;
Clinton  com.,  5 ;  P.  M.  and  P.  H.  Priest.
Smith,  Milton,  Butter  Dealer.  Venus,  152;  Mansfield  chap.,  28,  Mansfield
coun.,  11.
Vance,  J.  P.,  Merchant.    Venus,  152  ;  Mansfield  chap.,  28.
MARIETTA,  'Washington  County.
Mason,  Wm.  B.,  County  Recorder  and  President  of  the  Parker  Patent  Co.
P.  M.,  Mount  Moriah,  37  ;  H.vP.,  American  Union  chap.,  1 .
Winchester,  E.,  Editor  and  Publisher  Home  News,  Periodical  Dealer,  etc.
Secretary,  American  Union,  1 ;  American  Union  chap.,  1.
MARION,  Marion  County.
Crickett,  William,  Farmer  and  Drover.  Marion,  70 ;  Marion  chap.,  62 ;
Marion  coun.,  22.
Godman,  James  H.,  Attorney.  Marion,  70 ;  Marion  chap.,  62 ;  Marion
coun.,  22  ;  De  Molay  com.,  9.
Green,  Seth  E.,  Salesman.     Marion,  70;  Marion  chap.,  62.
Lucas,  H.  S.,  Dry  Goods  Dealer.  Marion,  70  ;  Marion  chap.,  62  ;  Marion
coun.,  22.

--- Sayfa 357 ---
ohio.  345
Merchant,  John  T.,  Farmer.     Marion,  70 ;  Marion  chap.,  62 ;  Marion  coun.,  22.
Peters,  Harvey,  Druggist.    Marion,  70  ;  Marion  chap.,  62  ;  Marion  coun.,  22.
Scofield,  W.  E.,  Attorney  and  Notary  Public.     Marion,  70.
Smith,  Charles,  Builder  and  Lumber  Dealer.  Marion,  70 ;  Marion  chap.,  62  ;
Marion  coun.,  22  ;  De  Molay  com.,  9.
Strelitz,  Julius,  Clothing  Merchant.     Marion,  70 ;  Marion  chap.,  62.
Thomas,  Henry,  Dealer  in  Millinery  and  Fancy  Goods,  Books  and  Stationery,
and  Notions.    Marion,  70.
Uncapher,  Isaac,  Produce  and  Wool  Dealer.  Marion,  70 ;  Marion  chap.,  62 ;
Marion  coun.,  22  ;  De  Molay  com.,  9.
MASSILLOBT,  Stark  County.
Albright,  P.  G.,  Wholesale  and  Retail  Dealer  in  Groceries  and  Provisions,
Wines,  Liquors,  etc.     Clinton,  47.
Allen,  Alex.,  Hardware,  Coach-trimmings,  Paints,  Oils,  etc.     Clinton,  47.
Atwater,  David,  Grocer  and  Provision  Dealer.  P.  J.  and  S.  W.,  Clinton,  47;
Treas.,  Hiram  chap.,  18;  R.  &  S.  M.;  Treas.,  Massillon  com.,  4 ;  G.  Sword
Bearer,  Grand  Commandery.
Bennett,  H.  R.,  Grocer.     Clinton,  47,  Navarre  P.  O.
Bucher,  Wm.,  Drugs,  Medicines,  Stationery,  etc.  P.  J.  and  S.  W.,  Clinton,
47 ;  P.  Treas.,  Hiram  chap.,  18.
Ohidister,  E.,  Dentist.  Secretary,  Clinton,  47 ;  Secretary,  Hiram  chap.,  18 ;
Recorder,  Massillon  com.,  4.
Clark,  J.  J.,  Manufacturer  Agricultural  Implements.     J.  D.,  Clinton,  47.
Clinton  Lodge,  47,  regular  meetings  first  Monday  each  month.
Core,  Joel,  Dry  Goods  Salesman.     Clinton,  47.
Harsh,  A.,  Umbrella  Manufacturer.     Clinton,  47  ;  Hiram  chap.,  18.
Harvey,  Thomas  ~W.,  Superintendent  Union  School.  W.  M.,  Clinton,  47 ;
Republic  chap.,  33 ;  R.  &  S.  M. ;  De  Molay  com.,  9.
Hoffman,  J.  J.,  Postmaster  and  News  Agent.     Clinton,  47  ;  Hiram  chap.,  18.
Holderbaum,  Augustus,  Agriculturalist.     Clinton,  47.
Howald,  Jeremiah,  Foreman  Russell's  Foundery.  Clinton,  47  ;  C.  H.,  Hiram
chap.,  18.  \
Jarvis,  Kent,  Dealer  in  Real  Estate  and  Agriculture.  Initiated  March  25th,
5823,  at  Cooperstown,  N.  Y. ;  Exalted  June  16th,  5824 ;  Past  Junior  Grand
Warden,  Grand  Lodge  of  Ohio ;  Past  Deputy  G.  H.  P.  Grand  Chapter  of  Ohio  ;
Grand  Master,  Grand  Encampment  of  Ohio.
Kachler,  E.,  Druggist  and  Chemist.     Clinton,  47.
Karthaus,  John  T.,  Attorney  and  Notary  Public.  P.  Sec'ry  and  Treasurer,
Clinton,  47 ;  P.  Sec'ry  and  Treasurer,  Hiram  chap.,  18.
Lowe,  John,  Tailor.     P.  J.  W.,  Clinton,  47.
Massillon  Commandery,  4,  meets  Thursday  on  or  before  full  moon.
Metz,  A.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.     Clinton,  47.
Rudenstein,  W.  F.,  Wholesale  and  Retail  Dealer  in  Drugs  and  Medicines.
P.  M.,  Clinton,  47 ;  H.  P.,  Hiram  chap.,  18  ;  R.  &  S.  M. ;  Order  High  Priest-
hood; G.  Marshal,  Grand  Chapter.
Scehertzer,  John,  Physician  and  Surgeon.  Clinton,  47 ;  P.  Scribe,  Hiram
chap.,  18  ;  Massillon  com.,  4.

--- Sayfa 358 ---
346  world's  masonic  register.
Shepley,  Fred.,  Cemetery  Sexton.  Tyler,  Clinton,  47  ;  Guard,  Hiram  chap.,
18  ;  Sentinel,  Massillon  com.,  4.
Underbill,  James  W.,  Attorney  at  Law  and  Probate  Judge.  P.  M.,  Clinton,
47  ;  P.  H.  P.,  Hiram  chap.,  18 ;  Eminent  Com.,  Massillon  com.,  4 ;  P.  G.  J.  W.,
Grand  Commandery.
Williams,  Thomas  H.,  Book-keeper  Russell  &  Co.  Clinton,  47 ;  Hiram  chap.,
18 ;  P.  Recorder,  Massillon  com.,  4.
Withington,  M.  A.,  Watches,  Jewelry,  etc.  P.  J.  and  S.  W.,  Clinton,  47 ;
P.  K.,  Hiram  chap.,  18 ;  R.  &  S.  M. ;  P.  Treas.,  Massillon  com.,  4.
Zielly,  Geo.,  Proprietor  American  Hotel.     Clinton,  47.
MINERVA,  Stark  County.
Bridenstein,  J.,  Saddle  and  Harness  Manufacturer.     P.  S.  W.,  Brown,  235.
Poster,  EL  A.,  Merchant,  firm  of  Haines  &  Foster.     Brown,  235.
Jerome,  James,  Agriculturalist.     Brown,  235.
Keith,  Stephen,  Mercantile  Salesman.    Brown,  235.
Perdue,  B.  R.,  Hardware  Dealer.  W.  M.,  Brown,  235  ;  King,  Alliance  chap.,
83;  Massillon  com.,  4.
Perdue,  F.  A.,  Leather  Manufacturer.  S.  W.,  Brown,  235  ;  Scribe,  Alliance
chap.,  83 ;  Massillon  com.,  4.
Tant,  C.  K,  School  Teacher.    Brown,  235.
MOUNT  GILEAD,  Morrow  County.
Beebee,  Judson  A.,  Attorney  and  Notary  Public.  Mount  Gilead,  206 ;  P.  H.
P.,  Gilead  chap.,  59 ;  Columbus  coun.,  8  ;  Mount  Vernon  com.,  1.
Clements,  W.  S.,  Probate  Judge.     Mount  Gilead,  206  ;  Gilead  chap.,  59.
Dunn,  A.  R.,  Attorney.  W.  M.,  Mount  Gilead,  206  ;  P.  H.  P.,  Gilead  chap.,
59.
Hewitt,  S.  M.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.  Mount  Gilead,  206  ;  P.  H.  P.,  Gilead
chap.,  59 ;  P.  H.  P.,  Columbus  coun.,  8  ;  Clinton  com.,  5.
Hull,  Wm.,  Dealer  in  Stoves  and  Tinware.  Mount  Gilead,  206 ;  Gilead
chap.,  59.
Irwin,  W.  Smith,  County  Auditor  and  Farmer.  Mount  Gilead,  206  ;  Gilead
chap.,  59.
Rowland,  L.  H.,  Merchant  Tailor.    Mount  Gilead,  206  ;  Gilead  chap.,  59.
NEW  PHILADELPHIA,  Tuscarawas  County.
Barnhill,  John  H.,  Attorney  and  Probate  Judge.  W.  M.,  New  Philadelphia,
177  ;  P.  S.,  New  Philadelphia  chap.,  38.
Copeland,  P.  H,  Blacksmith.  J.  W.,  New  Philadelphia,  177  ;  G.  M.  of  1st
Veil,  Tuscarawas  chap.,  38.
Elliott,  J.  D.,  Proprietor  Ohio  Democrat.     New  Philadelphia,  177.
Helwig,  B.  F.,  County  Auditor.     P.  M.,  Tuscarawas,  59.
Laughead,  John,  County  Clerk.  P.  S.  W.,  Lone  Star,  175;  Tuscarawas
chap.,  38.
McGonigal,  J.  B.,  Merchant  Tailor".  P.  S.  D.,  New  Philadelphia,  177 ;  C.  H.,
Tuscarawas  chap  ,  38.

--- Sayfa 359 ---
ohio.  347
Mcllvaine,  G.  W.,  Attorney  at  Law.  P.  M.,  New  Philadelphia,  177  ;  P.  C.  H.,
Tuscarawas  chap.,  38  ;  Massillon  com.,  4.
Robb,  W.  L.,  Saddle  and  Harness  Manufacturer,  and  Justice  of  the  Peace.
S.  W.,  New  Philadelphia,  177 ;  King,  Tuscarawas  chap.,  38 ;  Massillon
com.,  4.
Robinson,  A.  K.,  Hardware  Dealer.    New  Philadelphia,  177.
Stone,  H.  S.,  Dentist.    P.  S.  D.,  New  Philadelphia,  177.
Taylor,  0.  P.,  Attorney  and  Probate  Judge.  P.  M.,  New  Philadelphia,  177  ;
H.  P.,  Tuscarawas  chap,  38  ;  Columbus  coun.,  8;  Massillon  com.,  4;  Order
High  Priesthood.
"Wolf.  S.,  Attorney  at  Law.  P.  Secretary,  Mystic  Tie,  192 ;  New  Philadel-
phia, 177  ;  C.  H.,  Tuscarawas  chap.,  38  ;  Royal  and  S.  Master.
M'OB'WAIiK,  Huron  County.
Ayres,  Frederick  H.,  Mercantile  Clerk.     Mount  Vernon,  64.
Bates,  Augustus  B.,  Locomotive  Engineer.  Mount  Vernon,  64 ;  Huron
chap.,  7  ;  Norwalk  conn.,  24 ;  De  Molay  com.,  9.
Beard,  Charles  B.,  Carpenter  and  Joiner.     Mount  Vernon,  64.
Bedell,  Bernardus,  Butcher.     Mount  Vernon,  64.
Bedell,  Nathaniel,  Drover  and  Butcher.     Mount  Vernon,  64.
Benedict,  David  D.,  Farmer  and  Gardener.     Mount  Vernon,  64.
Benedict,  Piatt,  Danbury,  Ct.  T.  I.  G.  M.,  Norwalk  coun.,  24 ;  P.  G.  C,  De
Molay  com.,  9 ;  P.  G.  K.,  Grand  Chap.  First  White  settler  in  Norwalk,  and
first  Mason.
Benedict,  Wm.,  Blacksmith.     S.  W.,  Mount  Vernon,  64.
Brailey,  Jos.  H.,  Farmer  and  Operative  Mason.     Mount  Vernon,  64.
Buchanan,  Harvey,  Farmer  and  Operative  Mason.     Mount  Vernon,  64.
Burton,  Edward  S.,  Locomotive  Engineer.     Science,  50.
De  Witt,  W.  L.,  Manufacturer  of  Marble  Tomb-stones,  Monuments,  Furni-
ture Work,  etc.    Mount  Vernon,  64.
Doolittle,  L.,  Locomotive  Engineer.    Garrettsville,  246.
Dunbar,  Oliver  T.,  Locomotive  Engineer.     Mount  Vernon,  64.
Felton,  James  S.,  Farmer  and  Edge  Tool  Manufacturer.  Mount  Vernon,  64  ;
H.  P.,  Huron  chap.,  7  ;  Norwalk  coun.,  24;  De  Molay  encpt.,  9.
Fenn,  Edward  P.,  Traveling  Agent.     Mount  Vernon,  64.
Gaskill,  Jas.,  Machinist.     Temple,  14,  Albany,  N.  Y.
Gibson,  Timothy,  Physician.  Floral,  260  ;  Huron  chap.,  7  ;  Norwalk  coun.,
24;  De  Molay  encpt.,  9.
Glazer,  Adam,  Boiler-maker.     Mount  Vernon,  64.
Graves,  Frederick  W.,  Hotel-keeper.     Mount  Vernon,  64  ;  Huron  chap.,  7.
Harper,  Peter,  Blacksmith.    Science,  50.
Heath,  Daniel  L.,  Car  Builder.     Mount  Vernon,  64.
Hook,  Theodore,  Ornamental  Painter.    Mount  Vernon,  64.
Hoyt,  Wm.  R.,  Manufacturer  and  Dealer  in  Cabinet  Ware  of  all  kinds,  Coffins,
Metallic  and  Wood,  Lumber,  Shingles,  etc.    Mount  Vernon,  64.
Jaques,  Amos  F.,  Tobacconist.    Mount  Vernon,  64.
Kellogg,  Horace,  Druggist  and  Grocer.  W.  M.,  Mount  Vernon,  64 ;  R.  A.  C,
Huron  chap.,  7  ;  Guard,  Norwalk  coun.,  24.
23

--- Sayfa 360 ---
348  world's  masonic  register.
Knox,  Crawford,  Car  Builder.    Mount  Vernon,  64
Lake,  Ira,  Parmer  and  Mechanic.    Mount  Vernon,  64 ;   Huron  chap.,  7 ;
Norwalk  conn.,  24 ;  De  Molay  encpt.,  9.
Lowe,  William  H.,  Carpenter  and  Joiner.    Dakota,  7,  Minnesota.
Miller,  Charles  R.,  Master  Builder.    Mount  Vernon,  64;  Huron  chap.,  7;
Norwalk  coun.,  24.
Mitchell,  Wm.,  Teacher.     Mount  Vernon,  64 ;  Huron  chap.,  7 ;   Norwalk
coun.,  24 ;  Mount  Vernon  encpt,  1.     Removed  to  Mount  Vernon,  Knox  Co.
Pebbles,  Nelson  H.,  Carriage-maker.     "Wellington,  127  ;  Marshal  chap.,  47;
Norwalk  coun.,  24.
Petteys,  Walter,  Farmer.    Mount  Vernon,  64.
Pope,  Powler  W.,  Locomotive  Engineer.     Mount  Vernon,  64.
Power,  John  H.,  Foreman  C.  and  T.  Blacksmith  Shop.     Mount  Vernon,  64
Pray,   Ethan  A.,  Superintendent  Huron  County  Infirmary.      Floral,  265;
Huron  chap.,  7  ;  Norwalk  coun.,  24.
Pritchard,  Uriah,  Foreman  Coppersmith.    Mount  Vernon,  64.
Randolph,  John  F.,  Master  Builder.     Mount  Vernon,  64.
Rule,  Jas.  H,  Practical  Printer.    Mount  Vernon,  64.
Safford,  George  H,  Attorney  at  Law.  Mount  Vernon,  64 ;  Huron  chap.,  7 :
De  Molay  encpt.,  9.
Shelton,  Charles  E.,  Farmer  and  Drover.    Mount  Vernon,  64.
Smith,  Joseph  S.,  Farmer  and  Mason.     Mount  Vernon,  64.
Smith,  Luther  F.,  Locomotive  Engineer.     Mount  Vernon,  64.
Stokes,  Henry  P.,  Machinist.     Mount  Vernon,  64.
Stratton,  Daniel,  Jr.,  Teacher.    Wood  County,  112.
Suhr,  William,  Clothing  Merchant.     Mount  Vernon,  64 ;  Huron  chap.,  7.
Surles,  Ziba,  Agent  C.  and  T.  R.  R.     Mount  Vernon,  64;  Huron  chap.,  7.
Waggoner,  Marshall  0.  P.  M.,  Mount  Vernon,  64;  P.  S.,  Huron  chap.,  7;
Norwalk  coun.,  24.
Watrous,  Daniel,  Machinist.  Mount  Vernon,  64 ;  Huron  chap.,  7 ;  Colum-
bian com.,  1,  New  York.
Watrous,  George  E.,  Machinist.    Mount  Vernon,  64
Wells,  Ira  D.,  Farmer.    Erie,  239.
Welsh,  Oscar,  Farmer.    P.  M.,  Mount  Vernon,  64 ;  Huron  chap.,  7.
Whitbeck,  George  W.,  Attorney  at  Law.     Mount  Vernon,  64.
White,  Orsamus  A.,  Teacher  and  Mechanic.    Mount  Vernon,  64.
OBVILLE,  "Wayne  County.
McGill,  John,  Agent  P.  F.  W.  and  Chicago  Railroad.  Ebenezer,  33;
Wooster  chap.,  27.
Miller,  Akin  C,  Physician  and  Surgeon.     Ebenezer,  33.
Storrs,  C.  N.,  Agent  C.  Z.  C.  Railroad  and  Produce  Dealer.     Ebenezer,  33.
Switzer,  A.  H,  Stone-cutter  and  Bricklayer.     Bloomfield,  84,  Ind.
Switzer,  David  A.,  Stone-cutter  and  Bricklayer.     Ebenezer,  33.
Whitmyer,  M.,  Grocer  and  Druggist.     Ebenezer,  33  ;  Royal  Arch  Mason.
Willforce,  Dr.  S.  C,  Physician  and  Surgeon.  Ebenezer,  33  ;  Wooster  chap.
27  ;  Wooster  coun.,  13.

--- Sayfa 361 ---
ohio.  349
PAINESVILLE,  Lake  County.
Bishop,  E.  M.,  Manufacturer  Patent  Improved  Melodeons.  Temple,  28 ;
Painesville  chap.,  46.
Bissel,  Benj.,  firm  of  Bissel  &  Tinker,  Attorneys  at  Law.    P.  J.  W.,  Temple,  28.
Casement,  J.  S.,  Railroad  Contractor.  Temple,  28 ;  Webb  chap.,  14 ;  Oriental
com.,  12.
Childs,  Asa,  Saddle  and  Harness  Manufacturer.  W.  M.,  Temple,  28  ;  R.  A.  C,
Painesville  chap.,  46  ;  Royal  and  S.  Master.
Dickinson,  John,  Boot  and  Shoe  Manufacturer.  S.  W.,  Temple,  28 ;  C.  H.,
Painesville  chap.,  46 ;  Royal  and  S.  Master
Harvey,  Moses  S.,  Surveyor  and  Agriculturalist.  P.  M.,  Temple,  28  ;  P.  H.  P.,
Painesville  chap.,  46 ;  P.  C.  of  W.,  Painesville  coun.,  23.
Huntington,  Edwin,  Attorney  at  Law.    P.  Secretary,  Temple,  28.
Huntington,  Samuel  P.,  Dentist.  S.  D.  and  P.  M.,  Temple,  28 ;  G.  M.  of  2d
Veil,  Painesville  chap.,  46.
Kerr,  Moses,  Druggist  Clerk.    Temple,  28.
Loomis,  S.  T.,  Attorney  and  Justice  of  the  Peace.  Temple,  28 ;  H.  P.,
Painesville  chap.,  46.
Nevison,  W.  W.,  firm  of  Perkins  &  Nevison,  Attorneys  at  Law.  Temple,  28.
Scofield,  J.  P.,  Books  and  Stationery.  P.  M.,  Temple,  28 ;  King,  Painesville
chap.,  46.
"Williams,  A.  J.,  Attorney  at  Law.  P.  Secretary,  Temple,  28 ;  Painesville
chap.,  46.
Williams,  Henry  G.,  Merchant.    Temple,  28.
PORTSMOUTH,  Scioto  County.
Bratt,  Benjamin  J.,  Foreman  Portsmouth  Iron  Works.    Aurora,  48.
Findlay,  Alex.  W.,  Book-keeper,  56  Front  St.    Aurora,  48.
Jones,  N.  L.,  Carpenter  and  Joiner,  73  Third  St.  Aurora,  48;  Mt.  Vernon
chap.,  23^;  Solomon's  coun.,  5.
Kehoe,  John  C,  Boots,  Shoes,  Leather  Findings,  Hats,  etc.,  Front  St.,  2
doors  below  Jefferson.  Aurora,  48;  G.  M.,  2d  Veil,  Mt.  Vernon  chap.,  23;
T.  I.  G.  M.,  Solomon's  coun.,  5 ;  Calvary  com.,  13.
Levi,  Louis,  Clothing  Merchant,  Hats,  Caps,  Jewelry,  etc.,  8  Front  St.  Aurora,
48 ;  Mt.  Vernon  chap.,  23 ;  Solomon's  coun.,  5.
Lodwick,  James,  Insurance  Agent  and  City  Inspector.  Treasurer,  Aurora,
48;  Secretary,  Mount  Vernon  chap.,  23;  Solomon's  coun.,  5;  Treasurer,  Cal-
vary com.,  13.
Lusk,  J.  A.,  Book-keeper,  4  Front  St.  Aurora,  48  ;  0.  of  H,  Mt.  Vernon
chap.,  23 ;  Recorder,  Solomon's  coun.,  5.
Reilly,  W.  W.,  Bookseller  and  Stationer,  104  Front  St.  Aurora,  48 ;  Mount
Vernon  chap.,  23;  Solomon's  coun.,  5;  .Calvary  com.,  13.
PORT  "WASHINGTON,  Tuscarawas  County.
Anderson,  Wm.,  Cabinet  Manufacturer.    S.  W.,  Port  Washington,  202.
Barnes,  Samuel,  Merchant,  firm  of  Armstrong,  Barnes  &  Co.    Canton,  60.

--- Sayfa 362 ---
350  world's  masonic  register.
Carr,  Isaac  G.,  Parmer  and  Track  Master  P.  C.  and  C.  Railroad.  Tyler,
Port  Washington,  202.
Cornet,  L.  A.,  M.D.  and  Druggist.     Tuscarawas,  59  ;  Tuscarawas  chap.,  38.
Haskinson,  W.  J.,  Mercantile  salesman.  P.  Secretary,  Port  Washington,
202  ;  Tuscarawas  chap.,  38.
Mardis,  J.  D.,  Stoves,  Tinware,  etc.    J.  W.,  Port  Washington,  202.
Nelson,  David,  M.D.  and  Merchant.    P.  S.  W.,  Port  Washington,  202.
Ross,  Benj.,  Merchant  and  Agriculturalist.    J.  D.,  Port  Washington,  202.
Slade,  Samuel,  Stone-cutter  and  Operative  Mason.  S.  D.,  Port  Washington,
202  ;  Tuscarawas  chap.,  38.
EAVENNA,  Portage  County.
Bateman,  Thomas  E.,  Tailor.    P.  J.  W.,  Unity,  12.
Beatty,  J.  C,  Merchant.    Treasurer,  Unity,  12  ;  Washington  chap.,  25.
Day,  H.  L.,  Merchant.    W.  M.,  Unity,  12  ;  Washington  chap.,  25.
Pord,  Frank,  Photograph  Artist.     Unity,  12.
Grout,  Wm.  H.,  Assistant  Secretary  of  A.  and  G.  W.  Railroad.    Mansfield,  35.
Somerville,  James,  Proprietor  Portage  Sentinel.    P.  Sec'y,  Unity,  12.
Spaulding  B.,  Attorney  at  Law.     P.  M.,  Unity,  12.
Twitt,  Edmond,  Mercantile  Clerk.     Secretary,  Unity,  12.
Willard,  Horace  H.,  Attorney  at  Law.    J.  W.,  Unity,  12.
SANDUSKY  CITY.
Patterson,  Austin  L.,  Book-keeper.    Erie,  239  ;  Sandusky  City  chap.,  72.
Sharceau,  Francis,  Hair  Dresser.  Science,  50 ;  Sandusky  City  chap.,  72 ;
Sandusky  City  coun.,  26  ;  Ineffable  Mason  and  Knights  Templar.
Smead,  Isaac  N.,  Farmer.  Science,  50  ;  Sandusky  City  chap.,  72  ;  Sandusky
City  coun.,  26  ;  De  Molay  encpt.,  9.
STEUBEM-VILLE,  Jefferson  County.
Elliott,  James,  Attorney  at  Law  and  County  Clerk.  W.  M.,  Steubenville,  45 ;
P.  S.,  Union  chap.,  15.
Frohman,  M.,  Merchant  Tailor  and  Clothier.     Meridian,  234.
Hantch,  George,  Dealer  in  Tobacco,  Cigars,  Snuff,  etc.  J.  W.,  Steubenville,
45 ;  Union  chap.,  15.
Hays,  J.  H.,  Washington  Hall.     Meridian,  234.
Johnson,  Curtis  G.,  Attorney  at  Law.     Steubenville,  45.
Layng,  J.  D.,  Asst.  Sup't  P.  C.  and  C.  Railroad.  Steubenville,  45;  Union
chap.,  15.
May,  C.  M.,  Merchant  Tailor  and  Clothier.  W.  M.,  Meridian,  234 ;  R.  A.  C  ,
Union  chap.,  15  ;  Union  coun.,  2.
McKinney,  James,  Justice  of  the  Peace  and  Lumber  Merchant.  Steubenville,
45  ;  King,  Union  chap.,  15  ;  Union  coun.,  2 ;  C.  G.,  Steubenville  com.,  11.
Means,  Geo.  B.,  Founder  and  Engine  Builder.  P.  M.,  Meridian,  234;  G.  M.
1st  V.,  Union  chap.,  15  ;  P.  Recorder  and  Sword  Bearer,  Steubenville  com.,  11.
Means,  James,  Paymaster  P.  C.  and  O.  Railroad.  P.  S.  W.,  Steubenville,
45 ;  Union  chap.,  15  ;  Union  coun.,  2  ;  E.  C,  Steubenville  com.,  11.
Reed,  Robert,  Machinist.    J.  D.,  Meridian,  234.
Strayer,  Henry  B.,  Pattern  Maker.    Sec'y,  Meridian,  234.

--- Sayfa 363 ---
ohio.  351
Webster,  Capt.  Geo.,  Attorney  at  Law.  P.  M.,  Steuben ville,  45 ;  H.  P.,
Union  chap.,  15;  Dep'y  111.  G.  M.,  Union  coun.,  2;  Steubenville  com.,  11;  S.
G.  Warden,  Grand  Lodge  ;  Grand  Oapt.  General,  Grand  Commandery  of  Ohio.
Wells,  Joseph  H.,  Book-keeper.    Meridian,  234.
Wilson,  Samuel,  Stoves,  Tinware,  etc.  Steubenville,  45  ;  Scribe,  Union  chap.,
15 ;  Union  coun.,  2  ;  St.  B.,  Steubenville  com.,  11.
TJHBICH'VILIiE,  Tuscarawas  County.
Brisben,  Andrew,  Horse  Dealer.    P.  S.  W.,  Mystic  Tie,  192.
Chalfant,  David,  Physician  and  Surgeon.  P.  M.,  Mystic  Tie,  192  ;  P.  C.  H.,
Tuscarawas  chap.,  38 ;  Knight  of  Red  Cross.  ,
Ferguson,  B.  S.,  Mercantile  Salesman.     P.  J.  W.,  Mystic  Tie,  192.
Forbes,  Andrew,  Merchant.     P.  Sec,  Mystic  Tie,  192 ;  Tuscarawas  chap.,  38.
Haskins,  M.  R.,  Hotel-keeper  and  Merchant.     Mystic  Tie,  192.
Hunt,  0.  A.,  Locomotive  Engineer.     P.  J.  and  S.  W.,  Mystic  Tie,  192.
Milone,  John,  Boot  and  Shoe  Manufacturer.     W.  M  ,  Mystic  Tie,  192.
Mozena,  Thomas  H.,  Marble-worker  and  Operative  Mason.  P.  M.,  Mystic
Tie,  192.
Rowlee,  A.  B.,  Proprietor  Commercial  Hall.     Mystic  Tie,  192.
Thompson,  S.  R.,  M.D.  and  Druggist.     Mystic  Tie,  192.
WELLSVILLE,  Columbia  County.
Battin,  A.  H.,  Attorney  at  Law  and  Collecting  Agent.  W.  M  ,  Wellsville,
180;  P  S.,,  Wellsville  chap.,  55.
Geisse,  P.  F.,  Steam  Engine  Builder  and  Iron  Founder,  etc.  Wellsville,  180 ;
K.,  Wellsville  chap.,  55.
Lawrance,  Wm.,  Clothing  Merchant.  Made  a  Mason  in  New  Providence
Lodge,  128,  Tennessee.
Milligan,  James,  Merchant.  P.  J.  and  S.  W.,  Wellsville,  180 ;  P.  King,
Wellsville  chap.,  55  ;  R.  &  S.  M. ;  Steubenville  com.,  11.
Prosser,  J.  T.,  Merchant,  Water  and  Main  Sts.     Treasurer,  Wellsville,  180.
Riddle,  Judge  Joshua  A.,  Leather  Manufacturer  W.  M.,  Riddle,  315 ;  P.  M.,
Wellsville,  180;  H.  P.,  Wellsville  chap.,  55;  R.  &  S.  M.;  Steubenville  com.,
11 ;  Grand  King,  Grand  Chapter.
"Van  Tyne,  F.  R.,  Master  Machinist  River  Div.  C.  and  P.  Railroad.  S.  W.,
Wellsville,  180  ;  R.  A.  C,  Wellsville  chap.,  55.
Wilson,  Hugh  S.,  Merchant.  Treas.,  Wellsville,  180;  Treas.,  Wellsville
chap.,  55.
"WTLLOTJGHBY,  Lake  County.
Bates,  R.  C,  Merchant.    Willoughby,  302.
Brinkerhoof,  D.  H.,  Physician    and    Surgeon.      W.  M.,  Willoughby,  302  ;
P-  P.  S.,  Franklin  chap.,  24;  Mansfield  coun.,  11 ;  Reed  com.,  6.
More,  R.  B.,  Foundery  and  Machine  Shop.     Sec,  Willoughby,  302.
Neveu,  Charles  M.  O.,  Boot  and  Shoe  Dealer.     Willoughby,  302.
Richardson,  Wm.,  Architect  and  Builder.     Willoughby,  302.
Sco ville,  C.  W.    Willoughby,  302.
Storm,  S.  T.,  Flour  and  Lumber  Merchant.     S.  W.,  Willoughby,  302.
Williams,  Z.  F.,  Harness-maker.     J.  D.,  Willoughby,  302.

--- Sayfa 364 ---
OREGON.
GRAND    LODGE.     •
The  Grand  Lodge  of  Oregon  was  organized  August  16th,  5851.  The  Annual
Communications  of  this  Grand  Lodge  are  "  held  in  Oregon  City,  or  at  such  place
as  the  Grand  Lodge  may  hereafter  designate,"  commencing  on  the  2d  Monday  in
June.  The  Grand  Lodge  consists  of  the  Grand  Officers,  Past  Grand  and
Deputy  Grand  Masters,  Past  Grand  Wardens,  Grand  Secretaries  and  Grand
Treasurers,  Past  Masters,  and  Masters  and  Wardens  of  its  subordinate  Lodges.
The  revenue  of  the  Grand  Lodge  is  derived  from^ihe  following  sources: —
For  Dispensations  for  new  Lodges
$50
For  Charters,  in  addition    25
For  every  Degree
1
For  every  Affiliation    1
For  every  Member
1
For  Diplomas    .  2
There  were  22  subordinate  Lodges  in  this  jurisdiction  in  June,  5859.    Number
of  Members,  623  ;  Initiated  during  the  year,  109 ;  Passed,  89  ;  Baised,  81 ;  Ad-
mitted, 37 ;  Dimitted,  35 ;  Died,  5 ;  Rejected,  29  ;  Suspended,  4 ;  Expelled,  1 ;
Dues  to  Grand  Lodge,  $853  42.
The  Officers  for  the  present  year  are  as  follows  : —
Amokt  Holbeook,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
James  B.  Bayley,  B.  W.  Deputy  Grand  Master.
Avery  A.  Smith,  E.  W.  Senior  Grand  Warden.
W.  W.  Fowler,  E.  W.  Junior  Grand  Warden.
Ralph  Wilcox,  E.  W.  Grand  Treasurer.
T.  McF.  Patton,  E.  W.  Grand  Secretary.
This  Grand  Lodge  has  an  educational  fund,  which  in  July,  5859,  amounted
to  $4766  72,  the  voluntary  contributions  of  the  Masons  in  Oregon,  for  educa-
tional purposes.
The  following  resolutions  have  been  adopted  by  this  Grand  Lodge : —
Resolved,  That  no  petition  shall  be  received  from  any  candidate  for  initiation,
until  he  shall  have  resided  one  year  within  the  jurisdiction  of  this  Grand  Lodge.
Resolved,  That  in  the  opinion  of  this  Grand  Lodge,  it  is  not  sufficient  that  the
committee  to  investigate  the  character  and  qualifications  of  a  petitioner  for  the
mysteries  of  Masonry,  report  that  they  find  nothing  against  him,  but  must  state
what  his  standing  and  qualifications  are.
Resolved,  That  no  applicant  for  advancement  shall  be  allowed  to  receive  the
degree  applied  for,  until  he  shall  have  been  examined  in  open  Lodge,  and  proved
himself  a  proficient  in  the  work  and  lectures  of  the  preceding  degree.
(352)

--- Sayfa 365 ---
OREGON.
353
Resolved,  That  no  subordinate  Lodge  has  the  right  to  draw  from  the  Lodge
funds,  or  make  assessments  upon  members  for  any  purposes,  except  such  as  are
of  a  purely  charitable  nature,  nor  will  this  Grand  Lodge  countenance  any  such
expenditures  or  assessments  by  the  subordinate  Lodges  in  this  jurisdiction,  or
aid  in  enforcing  any  orders  of  a  subordinate  Lodge  for  any  but  purely  legitimate
purposes.
Besolved,  That  every  subordinate  Lodge  shall  be  required  to  be  represented
in  Grand  Lodge  by  one  of  its  own  members.
Besolved,  That  one  month  shall  intervene  between  conferring  degrees  upon  a
candidate.
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.
NO.          LODQE.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
1  Multnomah,
Oregon  City.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
W.  W.  Buck.
2  Willamette,
Portland.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Thomas  J.  Holmes.
3  Lafayette,
Lafayette.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
Geo.  H.  Steward.
4  Salem,
Salem.
1st  Monday.
A.  M.  Belt.
6  Tuality,
Hillsboro'.
Saturday  after  f.  m. Wm.  S.  Caldwell.
7  Temple,
Astoria.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays. A.  Van  Dusen.
9  Jennings,
Dallas.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Lemuel  Lyon.
10  Warren,
Jacksonville.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m. W.  W.  Fowler.
11  Eugene  City,
Eugene  City.
Sat.  b.  full  &  n.  m. Avery  A.  Smith.
12  Harmony,
Portland.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays .  Jacob  Davidson.
13  Laurel,
Roseburg.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
S.  F.  Chadwick.
14  Corvallis,
Corvallis.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m. John  B.  Cougle.
15  Wasco,
Dalles  City.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays. H.  P.  Isaacs.
16  Winchester,
Winchester.
Friday  before  f.  m.
L.  F.  Mosher.
17  Corinthian,
Albany.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
H.  A.  Cunningham.
18  Western  Star,
Kirbyville.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Thos.  F.  Floyd.
19  Ainsworth,
Salem.
1st  Saturday.
A.  W.  Ferguson.
20  Bethel,
Bethel.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
W.  C.  Warriner.
23  Phoenix,
Phcenix.
24  Rainier,
Rainier.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
George  Barlow.
25  Sublimity,
Sublimity.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays. Samuel  Parker.
26  Belt,
Browntown.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays. Gustaf  Wilson.
COMMANDERY.
On  the  24th  of  July,  1860,  B.  B.  French,  M.  E.  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand
Encampment  of  the  United  States,  issued  his  Dispensation  for  the  formation  of
"Oregon  Commandery,"  to  be  located  at  Oregon  City.
Benedict  Arnold  was  made  a  Mason  in  Hiram  Lodge,  No.  1,  New  Haven,
Connecticut,  April  10th,  1765,  at  which  time  he  was  twenty-five  years  old.

--- Sayfa 366 ---
PENNSYLVANIA.
GRAND  LODGE.
The  early  history  of  Freemasonry  in  Pennsylvania,  as  in  all  of  the  older
Masonic  jurisdictions  in  the  United  States,  is  involved  in  obscurity.  It  is
certain  that  a  Masonic  Lodge  existed  in  Philadelphia  in  5732,  and  the  gazettes,
the  only  authority  existing  upon  the  subject,  state  that  a  Grand  Lodge  was
held  in  5732,  at  the  "  Tun  Tavern,"  on  the  east  side  of  Water  Street,  between
Walnut  and  Chestnut  Streets,  the  fashionable  hotel  of  the  time.  We  give  below
a  copy  of  a  letter  written  by  Benjamin  Franklin  to  Henry  Price,  dated  Novem-
ber 28th,  5734,  who,  as  the  letter  shows,  wrote  to  Brother  Price  immediately
on  receiving  information,  unofficially,  that  his  powers  as  Provincial  Grand
Master  of  "Newengland"  were  extended  over  all  America.  This  letter,  corro-
borating the  notices  in  the  gazettes,  is  conclusive  that  a  Grand  Lodge  existed
in  Philadelphia  at  that  time  ;  and  that  it  held  its  meetings  annually,  and  at
which  it  elected  its  officers.  This  letter  was  written  by  Brother  Franklin  to
congratulate  Brother  Price  upon  his  appointment  as  Provincial  Grand  Master
over  all  America ;  and  he,  as  Grand  Master  of  his  Grand  Lodge,  wishing  to  be
satisfied  of  the  legality  of  his,  Brother  Price's,  appointment,  requested  him  to
send  copies  of  his  first  deputation,  and  also  copies  of  the  document  in  which  his
powers  were  enlarged,  legally  attested  by  his  Wardens  and  signed  by  the  Secre-
tary. It  will  also  be  noticed  that  Brother  Franklin  waived  none  of  his  rights  as
Grand  Master,  but  insisted  that  only  in  the  presence  of  a  superior  officer  the
chair  of  the  Grand  Master  of  Pennsylvania  would  be  yielded.  If,  as  is  generally
believed,  and  as  is  stated  in  the  Book  of  Constitutions  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Massachusetts,  published  in  5798,  Brother  Price  granted  a  warrant  for  a
Lodge  to  certain  brethren  in  Philadelphia,  and  of  which  Brother  Franklin  was
Master,  it  covXd  not  have  been  the  first  Lodge  established  in  Philadelphia.  It
will  also  be  seen  that  Brother  Franklin  signs  himself,  B.  Franklin,  G.  M.
"For  Mr.  Henry  Price,  at  the  Brazen  Head.
"Bight  W.  G.  Master  and  dear  Brethren  : —
"We  acknowledge  your  favor  of  the  twenty-third  of  October  past,  and  rejoice
that  the  Grand  Master  (whom  God  bless)  hath  so  happily  recovered  from  his
late  indisposition  ;  and  we  now,  glass  in  hand,  drink  to  the  establishment  of  his
health  and  to  the  prosperity  of  your  whole  Lodge.
"We  have  seen  in  the  Boston  prints  an  article  of  news  from  London,  import-
ing that  at  a  Grand  Lodge  held  there  in  August  last,  Mr.  Price's  deputation
and  power  was  extended  over  all  America,  which  advice  we  hope  is  true,  and  we
heartily  congratulate  him  thereupon ;  and  though  this  has  not  been  as  yet  regu-
larly signified  to  us  by  you,  yet,  giving  credit  thereto,  we  think  it  our  duty  to  lay
(354)

--- Sayfa 367 ---
PENNSYLVANIA.  355
before  your  Lodge  what  we  apprehend  needful  to  be  done  for  us,  in  order  to
promote  and  strengthen  the  interest  of  Masonry  in  this  province,  (which  seems
to  want  the  sanction  of  some  authority  derived  from  home,  to  give  the  proceed-
ings and  determinations  of  our  Lodges  their. due  weight,)  to  wit:  a  deputation
or  charter  granted  by  the  E.  W.  Mr.  Price,  by  virtue  of  his  commission  from
Britain,  confirming  the  brethren  of  Pennsylvania  in  the  privileges  they  at  present
enjoy,  of  holding  annually  their  Grand  Lodge,  choosing  their  Grand  Master,
Wardens,  and  other  officers  who  may  manage  all  affairs  relating  to  the  brethren
here,  with  full  power  and  authority,  according  to  customs  and  usages  of  Masons,
the  said  G.  M.  of  Pennsylvania  only  yielding  his  chair  when  the  G.  M.  of  all
America  shall  be  in  place.  This,  if  it  seem  good  and  reasonable  to  you  to  grant,
will  not  only  be  extremely  agreeable  to  us,  but  will  also,  we  are  confident,  con-
duce much  to  the  welfare,  establishment,  and  reputation  of  Masonry  in  these
"  We  therefore  submit  it  to  your  consideration  ;  and  as  we  hope  our  request  will
be  complied  with,  we  desire  that  it  may  be  done  as  soon  as  possible,  and  also
accompanied  with  a  copy  of  the  E.  W.  Grand  Master's  first  deputation,  and
of  the  instrument  by  which  it  appears  to  be  enlarged  as  above  mentioned,
witnessed  by  your  Wardens  and  signed  by  the  Secretary.  For  which  favors,
this  Lodge  doubt  not  of  being  able  so  to  behave  as  not  to  be  ungrateful.
"We  are,  Eight  Worshipful  Grand  Master  and  brethren,  your  affectionate
brethren  and  obliged  humble  servants.
"  Signed  at  the  request  of  the  Lodge.
"B.  Franklin,  G.  M.
"Philadelphia,  Nov.  28th,  1734."
It  was  in  the  year  5734  that  Brother  Franklin  "  reprinted  in  Philadelphia,  by
special  order,  for  the  use  of  the  brethren  in  North  America,"  the  5723  edition
of  Anderson's  Constitution,  and  which  was  the  first  Masonic  book  printed  in
America.
In  5735  the  Grand  Lodge  changed  its  quarters  from  the  Tun  Tavern  to  the
Indian  King,  at  the  corner  of  Biddle's  Alley,  in  Market  Street  below.  Third.
On  the  10th  of  July,  5749,  Thomas  Oxnard,  Esq.,  who  had  received  the
appointment  of  Provincial  Grand  Master  of  North  America,  appointed  Benja-
min Franklin,  Esq.,  provincial  Grand  Master  of  Pennsylvania,  with  authority  to
appoint  the  other  Grand  Officers,  to  hold  a  Grand  Lodge,  issue  warrants,  etc.
Under  this  warrant,  a  Grand  Lodge  was  held  on  the  5th  of  September,  5749,  at
the  "Koyal  Standard,"  on  Market  Street  near  Second;  and  Grand  Master
Franklin  appointed  Br.  Thomas  Bond,  D.  G.  M. ;  Joseph  Shippen,  S.  G.  W. ;
Philip  Syng,  J.  G.  W. ;  William  Plumsted,  G.  Treas. ;  Daniel  Byles,  G.  Sec.
At  the  same  meeting  a  warrant  was  granted  for  a  new  Lodge  in  the  City  of
Philadelphia  to  James  Pogreen  and  others.  At  a  communication  of  the  Grand
Lodge,  held  March  13th,  5750,  William  Allen,  Esq.,  Eecorder  of  the  City  of
Philadelphia,  presented  his  commission  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,
appointing  him  Provincial  Grand  Master.  His  commission  was  recognized,
and  he  appointed  Benjamin  Franklin  Deputy  Grand  Master.  The  record  from
which  we  extract  the  above  states,  "As  far  as  the  minutes  of  the  modern  Grand
Lodge  go,  Dr.  Franklin  was  never  absent  from  a  meeting."

--- Sayfa 368 ---
356  world's  masonic  register.
Soon  after  this  time  the  craft  built  themselves  a  hall  on  the  site  of  the  old
Bank  of  Pennsylvania,  on  Second  near  Walnut  Street.  The  building,  which
was  of  brick,  was  finished  about  the  year  5754,  and  was  inaugurated  with  much
ceremony.  Lodge  Alley,  now  called  Gold  Street,  took  its  name  from  this
building.  There  is  a  record  that  Lodge  No.  2,  in  Philadelphia,  was  constituted
in  5758.
In  the  year  5764,  (an  old  record  in  our  possession  says  5761,)  a  patent  for  a
Provincial  Grand  Lodge  was  issued  to  William  Ball  and  others  by  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Ancient  Masons  in  London.  The  record  in  our  possession  states  that
the  charter  granted  to  William  Ball  was  "No.  1  in  Pennsylvania  and  No.  89  in
England,  and  registered  in  the  Grand  Lodge,  London,  vol  iii.,  letter  C,  and
bears  date  July  14th,  5761.  It  is  signed  by  Kelly,  (Thomas  ErsMne,  Earl
Kelly,  Viscount  Fenton,  etc.,)  G.  Master ;  Wm.  Osborn,  D.  G.  Master  ;  William
Dickey,  S.  G.  Warden ;  J.  Gibson,  J.  G.  Warden ;  Law.  Dermott,  G.  Secretary."
The  prior  patents  and  authorities  issued  to  Pennsylvania  were  from  the
Grand  Lodge  of  so-called  Modern  Masons.  It  would  seem  that  a  Grand
Lodge  of  Ancient  and  Modern  Masons  existed  in  Pennsylvania  at  this  time,  as
it  appears  on  the  minutes  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  held  on  November
17th,  5760,  that  "    Franklyn,  Esq.,  Provincial  Grand  Master  of  Phila-
delphia," was  then  present  in  his  official  capacity.     The  record  also  continues
in  its  enumeration  of  officers  present,  "   Franklyn,  Esq.,  Provincial  Grand
Secretary  of  Philadelphia."
During  the  occupancy  of  Philadelphia  by  the  British,  in  the  war  of  Independ-
ence, it  is  supposed  the  records  of  Masonry  were  destroyed  or  carried  off.  On
the  20th  of  December,  5779,  Brother  Ball,  as  Grand  Master,  convened  a  Grand
Lodge  for  the  purpose  of  reorganization,  at  which  an  election  was  held,  and
Brother  Ball  was  elected  Grand  Master.  There  was  a  public  procession  and
installation  on  that  occasion,  and  a  sermon  by  the  Kev.  Brother  William  Smith,
who  was  appointed  Grand  Secretary.  At  a  special  communication  of  the  Grand
Lodge,  in  January,  5780,  resolutions  were  adopted  favorable  to  the  establish-
ment of  a  General  Grand  Lodge,  and  General  Washington  recommended  as  its
first  General  Grand  Master.  On  the  25th  of  September,  5786,  a  communication
of  the  Grand  Lodge  was  held,  at  which  thirteen  Lodges  were  represented,  and
after  mature  deliberation,  the  following  resolution  was  unanimously  passed :
"Resolved,  That  it  is  improper  that  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania  do
remain  any  longer  under  the  authority  of  a  foreign  Grand  Lodge."  The  Grand
Lodge  then  closed  sine  die.  The  Convention  assembled  on  the  following  day,
26th  September,  5786,  and  unanimously  resolved  that  the  Lodges  under  the
jurisdiction  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania,  lately  holden  as  a  Provincial
Grand  Lodge,  under  the  authority  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  should,  and
they  did,  form  themselves  into  a  Grand  Lodge,  to  be  called  "The  Grand  Lodge
of  Pennsylvania,  and  Masonic  jurisdiction  thereunto  belonging,"  to  be  held  in
the  City  of  Philadelphia.  Since  that  time  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania
has  pursued  the  even  tenor  of  its  way  quietly  and  in  harmony,  and  although  at
times  affected  by  the  discordant  elements  of  society,  it  has  never  swerved  from
its  line  of  duty,  and  has  always  maintained  a  high  position  among  its  sister
Grand  Lodges.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania  consists  of  the  Grand  and  Past  Grand

--- Sayfa 369 ---
PENNSYLVANIA.  357
Officers,  Past  Masters,  and  Masters  and  Wardens  of  its  constituent  Lodges.
The  Grand  Lodge  holds  four  Quarterly  Communications,  on  the  first  Mondays
of  March,  June,  September,  and  December,  and  a  Grand  Communication  on  the
twenty-seventh  of  December.  Its  Communications  are  held  in  the  City  of
Philadelphia.  The  revenue  of  the  Grand  Lodge  is  derived  from  the  following
sources : —
Prom  the  rents  of  the  Masonic  Hall.
For  "Warrants  for  new  Lodges    $81
For  Dispensations  to  pass  the  Chair    5
For  Dispensations  to  Enter,  Pass,  and  Eaise,  all  or  either     .  1 0
'  For  Grand  Lodge  Certificates    2
For  Grand  Lodge  dues    1
For  every  Initiation  in  Philadelphia,  and  within  five  miles
of  the  Temple    7
For  Initiations  in  all  other  Lodges    2
There  are  173  subordinate  Lodges  in  Pennsylvania.  The  returns  of  151
Lodges,  for  the  year  5858,  give  the  number  of  Members,  11,983  ;  and  the  number
Admitted  during  the  year,  454 ;  the  number  Initiated,  1225  ;  Rejections,  168 ;
and  Suspensions  and  Expulsions,  518.  The  receipts  of  the  Grand  Lodge  for
the  year  ending  November  15th,  5859,  were  $33,423  63.
At  an  election  held  on  Monday  evening,  December  3d,  5860,  the  following
named  brethren  were  elected  officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  to  serve  the  ensuing
Masonic  year : —
John  Thomson,  E.  W.  Grand  Master.
D.  C.  Skerkett,  B.  W.  Deputy  Grand  Master.
Lucios  H.  Scott,  E.  W.  Senior  Grand  Warden.
John  L.  Goddakd,  E.  W.  Junior  Grand  Warden.
Petek  Williamson,  R.  W.  Grand  Treasurer.
William  H.  Adams,  E.  W.  Grand  Secretary.
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.
No.       Lome.  Location.
2
 Philadelphia.
3
 Philadelphia.
9
 Philadelphia.
19  Montgomery,      Philadelphia.
21  Perseverance,     Harrisburg.
22
 Sunbury.
25  Bristol,  Bristol.
43
 Lancaster.
45
 Pittsburg.
51
 Philadelphia.
62  Harmony,  Philadelphia.
59  Washington,       Philadelphia.
60  Brownsville,       Brownsville.
61
 Wilkesbarre.
Time  of  Meeting.
8d  Monday.
3d  Tuesday.
1st  Friday.
1st  Thursday.
2d  Monday.
Evening  of  f.  moon.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  Wednesday.
Last  Wednesday.
4th  Thursday.
1st  Wednesday.
2d  Tuesday.
1st  Monday.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Master.
John  Green.
Andrew  J.  Wester.
Jas.  Palmer.
A.  Q.  Goodall.
Bobt.  L.  Muenoh.
Chas.  Pleasants.
Franklin  Vanzant.
John  L.  Atlee.
Wm.  A.  Lare.
Sterling  Bell.
John  Wilson.
John  B.  Coburn.
Isaac  Jackson.
Jas.  P.  Dennis.

--- Sayfa 370 ---
358
world's  masonic  register.
No.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
62
67  Concordia,
70  Rural  Amity,
71  Lafayette,
72  Philadelphia,
75  Phoenix,
81  Hiram,
91  Columbia,
106
108  Union,
114  Solomon's,
115  St.  John's,
121  Union,
125  Herman's,
126  Rising  Star,
130  Phoenix,
131  Industry,
134  Franklin,
135  Roxborough,
138  Schuylkill,
143  6.  Washington,
144  Charity,
152  Easton,
153  Waynesburg,
155  Mount  Moriah,
156  Washington,
158  Meridian  Sun,
163  Evergreen,
164  Washington,
186  Eastern  Star,
187  Integrity,
190  Charity,
194  Lafayette,
197  Cumberl'd  Star,
199  Lafayette,
203  Lewistown,
211  Kensington,
216  Pulaski,
218  Honesdale,
219  St.  John's,
220  Portage,
221  Franklin,
222
223  Alleghany,
224  Danville,
225  Philanthropy,
226  Lebanon,
227  Chandler,
228  Fayette,
.  Reading.
Philadelphia.
Athens.
Philadelphia.
Philadelphia.
Phoenixville.
Chestnut  Hill.
Philadelphia.
.  Williamsport.
Towanda.
Philadelphia.
Philadelphia.
Philadelphia.
Philadelphia.
Philadelphia.
Philadelphia.
Philadelphia.
Philadelphia.
Manayunk.
Orwigsburg.
Chambersburg.
Lewisburg.
Easton.
Waynesburg.
Philadelphia.
Drumore  Centre.
Philadelphia.
Monroeton.
Washington.
Philadelphia.
Philadelphia.
Norristown.
Selin's  Grove.
Carlisle.
Look  Haven.
Lewistown.
Kensington.
Potts  ville.
Honesdale.
Pittsburg.
Hollidaysburg.
Pittsburg.
Minersville.
Alleghany  City.
Danville.
Greensburg.
Lebanon.
Reading.
Uniontown.
1st  Wednesday.
2d  Friday.
Tues.  on  or  b .  f.  m.
4th  Wednesday.
3d  Thursday.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
4th  Monday.
Evening  of  f.  moon.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
3d  Friday.
2d  Monday.
2d  Thursday.
4th  Friday.
4th  Monday.
3d  Wednesday.
2d  Monday.
Last  w.  d.  in  each  m
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
Thursday  af.  f.  m.
2d  Monday.
4th  Tuesday.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Tuesday.
Tuesday  af.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
2d  Wednesday.
2d  Thursday.
Wednesday  af.  f.  m.
Monday  of  f.  moon.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
Thur.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  Tuesday.
1st  Friday.
Monday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  Thursday.
3d  Tuesday.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
2d  Wednesday.
1st  secular  e  af.f.m.
2d  Monday.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Tuesday.
2d  Monday.
Albert  C.  Henry.
Geo.  W.  Wood.
H.  C.  Baird.
Frank  S.  Johnson.
Henry  Jas.  White.
A.  S.  Vanderslice.
Peter  K.  Shriver.
Richard  C.  Krider.
Robt.  Fleming.
E.  H.  Mason.
Wm.  S.  Stokely.
John  W.  Leigh.
M.  H.  Treadwell.
S.  S.  Garrigues.
J.  Wesley  Miller.
Isaac  W.Van  Houten.
Jos.  W.  Miller.
Wm.  H.  Hooper.
John  Kline.
Peter  H.  Frailey.
Henry  S.  Stoner.
Chas.  S.  Crites.
Wm.  B.  Semple.
Jos.  H.  Hedges.
Wm.  S.  Thompson.
David  Weatherly,  Jr.
Jas.  C.  Achison.
Jas.  B.  Stevenson.
John  Neill.
Florance  Sullivan.
Wm.  F.  Eckbert.
John  A.  Humerich.
Michael  B.  Hering.
Jno.  Dickson.
Decatur  E.  Nice.
Coe  F.  Young.
Wm.  P.  Thomson.
John  Cresswell,  Jr.
John  H.  Bailey.
Thos.  Verner.
Wm.  H.  Slack.
Saml.  Stroh.
Saml.  T.  McAdam.
Geo.  W.  Durell.

--- Sayfa 371 ---
PENNSYLVANIA.
359
No.
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
Master.
229  Rochester,
230  Richmond,
231  Solomon's,
232  La  Belle  Valle,
233  St.  John's,
234  Crawford,
235  Presque  Isle,
236  Chester,
237  Chandler,
238  Tamaqua,
239  Armstrong,
240  Warren,
241  North  Star,
242  Carbon,
243  Mahoning,    -
244
245  Doylestown,
246  Shekinah,
247  Friendship,
248  Temple,
249  Carbondale,
250  Sharon,
251  Hebron,
252  Gummert,
253  Washington,
254  Stichter,
255  Shamokin,
256  Milton,
258  W.  Crawford,
259  Union,
260  St.  John's,
261  Hiram,
262  Orrstown,
263  Franklin,
264  Columbus,
265  Bloomsburg,
266  York,
267  Swatara,
268  Bellefonte,
269  Monongahela,
270  Page,
271  Keystone,
272  Butler,
273  Cassia,
274  Hamilton,
275  Loyalhanna,
276  Hobah,
277  Clarion,
278  Cambria,
Rochester.
Port  Richmond.
Pittsburg.
Jersey  Shore.
Pitts  ton.
Meadville.
Erie.
Chester.
Beallsville.
Tamaqua.
Freeport.
Montrose.
Warren.
Mauch  Chunk.
New  Castle.
.  Kittanning.
Doylestown.
Philadelphia.
Covington.
Tunkhannock.
Carbondale.
Sharon.
Mercer.
Fayette  City.
Pittsburg.
Pottstown.
Shamokintown.
Milton.
Conneautville.
New  Brighton.
Carlisle.
Providence.
Orrstown.
Laceyville.
Columbus.
Bloomsburg.
York.
Tremont.
Bellefonte.
Birmingham.
Schuylkill  Haven.
Philadelphia.
Butler.
Athensville.
W.  Philadelphia.
Latrobe.
Brookville.
Clarion.
Johnstown.
Friday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Tuesday.
3d  Friday.
Friday  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  Wednesday.
Friday  b.  f.  m.
4th  Thursday.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
4th  Tuesday.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Thursday.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  Monday.
2d  Wednesday.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Monday  b.  f.  m.
Monday  on  or  b.  f.  m
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
3d  Thursday.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  af.  f.  m.
1st  Tuesday.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Wednesday.
1st  Wednesday.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m
4th  Tuesday.
1st  Monday.
2d  Monday.
Thurs.  aft.  1st  Mon,
2d  Tuesday.
Danl.  Brilf ain.
Chris.  Olnhausen.
John  Lawshe.
H.  K.  Ebert.
Saml.  B.  Dick.
J.  E.  Forrester.
Jas.  Holmes,  Jr.
Fred.  F.  Kolb.
John  M.  Olney.
Saml.  L.  Kellam.
Elliot  S.  N.  Morgan.
R.  L.  Brown.
Nathan  C.  James.
Albert  D.  Boileau.
Lewes  B.  Smith.
Jacob  Dewitt.
Jas.  Hosie.
J.  M.  Irvine.
John  Trunkey.
Michael  Slawterbeck.
Thos.  E.  Rose.
Wm.  C.  Rutter.
O.  M.  Robins.
Henry  Aug.  Moodie.
D.  D.  Williams.
R.  L.  McGowan.
George  Weise.
Ambrose  Mulley.
Jas.  B.  Orr.
Mark  Keeney.
Jacob  Melick.
Robt.  J.  Fisher.
Gabriel  Drake.
John  T.  Hoover.
M.  W.  Acheson.
John  B.  Keefer.
Jas.  F.  Neall.
Lewis  Z.  Mitchell.
John  Siter  Parke.
Henry  M.  Deohert.
D.  L.  McCullough.
A.  L.  Gordon.
C.  L.  Lamberton.
John  P.  Linton.

--- Sayfa 372 ---
360
world's  masonic  register.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
MA8TBE.
279  Neweomb,
280  Harmony,
281  Mountain,
282  Juniata,
283  Bethlehem,
284  Porter,
285  Anthracite,
286  Columbia,
287  Milnor,
288  Jefferson,
289  Orient,
290  Eureka,
291  Union,
292  Frankford,
293  Mount  Moriah,
294  Ashland,
295  Melita,
296  Mitchell,
297  Chartiers.
298  G.  W.  Bartram,
299  Muncy,
300  Mount  Moriah,
301  Waverly,
302  Eureka,
303  Oil  Creek,
304  Western  Star,
305  Hawley,
306  Trojan,
307  Williamson,
308  Washington,
309  Williamson,
310  Warren,
311  Mount  Bethel,
312  Summit,
313  Indiana,
314  Clearfield,
315  Cumb'nd  Valley
316
317  Ossea,
318  M.  Kinley,
319  Adams,
320  Bedford,
321  Hailman,
322  WestChester,
323  Peter  WilUa'son,
324  Union,
325  Barger,
326  Lehigh,
327  Hazel,
Carmichaels.
Canton.
Altoona.
Hollidaysburg.
Bethlehem.
Catasauqua.
St.  Clair.
Columbia.
Pittsburg.
Alleghany  City.
Philadelphia.
West  Greenville.
Scranton.
Frankford.
Huntingdon.
Ashland.
Philadelphia.
Germantown.
Canonsburg.
Media.
Muncy.
Huntingdon.
Waverly.
Mechanicsburg.
Titusville.
Albion.
Hawley.
Troy.
Womelsdorf.
Fort  Washington.
Downingtown.
Perkiomen  Bridge.
Williamsburg.
Ebensburg.
Indiana.
Clearfield.
,Shippensburg.
Franklin.
Wellsboro'.
Alleghany  City.
Bloomfield.
Bedford.
East  Liberty.
West  Chester.
Scranton.
Mifflintown.
Stroudsburg.
Trexlertown.
Hazleton.
.Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  Tuesday.
Mon.  on  or  aft.  f.  m.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
Friday  after  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Thursday.
2d  Tuesday.
1st  Wednesday.
3d  Thursday.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
3d  Friday.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thurs.  on  or  a.  f.  m.
4th  Wednesday.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  Monday.
1st  Monday.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Thursday.
Saturday  a.  f.  m.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  a.  f.  m.
4th  Tuesday.
2d  Wednesday.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Israel  L.  Craft.
Geo.  B.  Cramer.
Thos.  McFarlane.
Kichard  W.  Leibert.
Wm.  R.  Houser.
Lewis  H.  Koch.
Chris.  S.  Kaufman.
Wm.  T.  Moore.
Nicholas  Voegtly.
Wm.  F.  White.
Jos.  Vickers.
Ed.  P.  Kingsbury.
Thos.  R.  Garsed.
Jas.  J.  Conner.
Henry  L.  Sinexon.
Thos.  J.  Roberts.
John  Brown.
Saml.  B.  Thomas.
Rev.  Joshua  Kelly.
John  Scott.
Jas.  L.  Wilbur.
John  Palmer.
.  B.  H.  Galpin.
Henry  J.  Tarble.
David  S.  Mathews.
Chas.  T.  Aiman.
J.  Benner  Evans.
Wm.  R.  Rittenhouse.
.  Josiah  Reimer.
A.  A.  Barker.
John  M.  Gaughey.
.  Henry  Ruby.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.  Robt.  C.  Simpson.
2d  Tuesday.  Jas.  Donnelly.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  Wednesday.
Last  Monday.
1st  Tuesday.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Rev.  N.  E.  Gilds.
Aug.  H.  Gross.
John  J.  Pinkerton.
Wm.  A.  Chittenden.
Wm.  Dent.
A.  Reeves  Jackson.
Benj.  Rupp.
David  Clark.

--- Sayfa 373 ---
PENNSYLVANIA.
361
NO.         LODOE.
Location.
Time  op  Meetins.
Master.
328  Freedom,
329  J.  E.  Craft,
330  Salem,
331  Ligonier,
332  Plymouth,
333  Barger,
334  Union,
335  Eureka,
337  H.  M.  PhillipB,
338  Great  Bend,
339  Hyde  Parfy
340  Thomson,
841  Factoryville,
Harford.
Greensboro'.
Salem.
Ligonier.
Plymouth.
Allentown.
Bradford.
MontoursTille.
.  Gettysburg.
Monongahela.
Great  Bend.
Hyde  Park.
East  Whiteland.
Factoryville.
.  Vm.  D.  Curtis.
.  Geo.  S.  Kemble.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.      Alfred  J.  G.  Dubs.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.    Peter  J.  Marsh.
GRAND  CHAPTER.
The  Grand  Chapter  of  Pennsylvania  was  organized  November  23d,  1795.
This  GraDd  Chapter  is  sovereign  and  independent.  It  holds  its  Convocations
in  the  City  of  Philadelphia,  on  the  third  Mondays  in  February,  May,  August,
and  November,  and  on  the  twenty-seventh  of  December.  It  has  38  subordinate
Chapters  under  its  jurisdiction.  The  number  of  Members,  in  5859,  was  1891.
The  number  marked  in  the  Chapters  during  the  year,  253 ;  Received  and  Ac-
cepted, 283 ;  Exalted,  281.
SUBORDINATE  CHAPTERS.
No.        Name.
3  Jerusalem,
21  Perseverance,
43

62  Harmony,
91  Columbia,
150  Washington,
152  Reading,
159  Schuylkill,
161  Union,
162  Zerubbabel,
163  Lafayette,
164  Brownsville,
166  Mount  Moriah,
167  Eureka,
169  Philadelphia,
171  St.  John's,
172  Temple,
173  Easton,
174  Northumberland,
Location.
Philadelphia.
Harrisburg.
Lancaster.
Philadelphia.
Philadelphia.
Washington.
Reading.
Minersville.
Towanda.
Pittsburg.
Lock  Haven.
Brownsville.
Hollidaysburg.
Rochester.
Philadelphia.
Carlisle.
Tunkhannock.
Easton.
Sunbury.
Time  of  Meeting.
4th  Monday.
1st  Monday.
4th  Wednesday.
1st  Friday.
3d  Wednesday.
1st  Tuesday.
2d  Monday.
Thursday  on  or  before  f.  m.
Thursday  on  or  before  f.  m.
1st  Tuesday.
Thursday  after  full  moon.
2d  Tuesday.
1st  Tuesday.
Tuesday  before  full  moon.
3d  Friday.
1st  Thursday.
2d  Monday.
4th  Monday.
Tuesday  after  full  moon.

--- Sayfa 374 ---
362
world's  masonic  register.
No.       Name.  Location.
175  Keystone,  Philadelphia.
176  George  Washington,  Chambersburg.
177  Tamaqua,  Tamaqua.
178  Catawissa,  Catawissa.
179  Eureka,  Carbondale.
180  Warren,  Montrose.
181  Lilly,  Mauch  Chunk.
182  Shekinah,  Wilkesbarre.
183  Oriental,  Philadelphia.
185  Lackawanna,  Scranton.
187  Oriental,  Conneautville.
189  Mountain,  Altoona.
190  Norristown,  Norristown.
191  Solomon's,  Meadville.
192  Urania,  Greensburg.
194     Wellsborough.
195     Pottsville.
196     Lebanon.
197     Phoenixville.
Time  op  Meeting.
4th  Friday.
2d  Tuesday.
Friday  after  full  moon.
Wednesday  before  full  moon.
Wednesday  after  full  moon.
2d  Thursday  bef.  full  moon.
4th  Tuesday.
3d  Tuesday.
1st  Thursday.
2d  Tuesday.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
1st  Thursday  &  3d  Monday.
1  st  Wednesday.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
4th  Tuesdays.
GRAND  COUNCIL.
The  Grand  Council  of  E.  and  S.  Masters  of  Pennsylvania  was  organized
October  26th,  5847.  Its  place  of  assembling  is  determined  each  year  by  the
Grand  Council.  It  has  15  subordinate  Councils  under  its  jurisdiction.  Its  Fif-
teenth Annual  Assembly  is  to  be  held  in  the  City  of  Pittsburg,  on  the  second
Tuesday  of  June,  5861.    The  number  of  members  reported,  460.
SUBORDINATE  COUNCILS.
No.        Name.
Location.
Organized.
1  Washington,
Washington.
November  16,  5847.
2  Mount  Moriah,
Pittsburg.
June            5,  5848,
3  Greene,
Waynesburg.
April         10,  5855.
4  Fayette,
Brownsville.
April         16,  5855.
5  St.  John's,
Carlisle.
December  28,  5855.
6  Uniontown,
Uniontown.
January    28,  5856.
7  Parke,
Harrisburg.
April         29,  5856.
8  Palestine,
Pottstown.
May           29,  5856.
9  Altoona,
Altoona.
December  16,  5857.
10  Mount  Moriah,
Bloomsburg.
December  25,  5857.
11  Philadelphia,
Philadelphia.
June          24,  5858,
13  Olivet,
Greensburg.
January      3,  5860.
15  Wright,
Lewis  town.
May           18,  5860.
16  Creigh,
Reading.
June          25,  5860.
17  Knapp,
Pottsville.
July             9,  5860.

--- Sayfa 375 ---
PENNSYLVANIA,
3G3
GRAND  COMMAS  DERY.
The  Grand  Commandery  of  Pennsylvania  was  organized  April  12th,  1854
It  is  subordinate  to  the  General  Grand  Encampment.  It  is  not  permanently
located.  It  has  20  subordinate  Oommanderies  under  its  jurisdiction.  N  The  num-
ber of  Sir  Knights,  637.
SUBORDINATE  OOMMANDERIES.
No.  Name.
1  Pittsburg,
2  Philadelphia,
3  Jacques  de  Molay,
4  St.  John's,
5  Hubbard,
6
7  St.  Omer's,
8  St.  John's,
9  De  Molay,
10  Mountain,
11  Parke,
12  Crusade,
13  Columbia,
14  Palestine,
15  Jerusalem,
16  Northern,
17  Coeur  de  Lion,
18  Kedron,
19  Hugh  de  Payeu's,
20  Allen,
Location.
Pittsburg.
Philadelphia.
Washington.
Philadelphia.
Waynesburg.
Uniontown.
Carlisle.
Reading.
Altoona.
Harrisburg.
Bloomsburg.
Lancaster.
CFirbondale.
Pottstown.
Towanda.
Scranton.
Greensburg.
Easton.
Allentown.
Time  of  Meeting.
2d  Tuesday.
2d  Friday.
1st  Friday.
4th  Friday.
3d  Wednesday.
4th  Thursday.
4th  Tuesday.
Friday  af.  2d  Monday.
Monday  bef.  full  moon.
3d  Friday.
SUBSCE1BEKS'   NAMES.
ALLEO-HABTT  CITY.
Anshutz,  Henry,  Iron  Foundery.  P.  M.,  Jefferson,  288 ;  Zerubbabel  chap.
162.
McGee,  W.  H.,  Merchant  Tailor.    St.  John's,  219.
Mellinger,  Martin,  Steamboat  Captain.     St.  John's,  219.
Smith,  L.  W.,  Eailroad  Conductor.  Franklin,  221 ;  Zerubbabel  chap .,  162  ;
Washington  conn.,  1 ;  Pittsburg  com.,  1.
ALLEU'TOWN,  Lehigh  County.
Algert,  Henry  K.,  Express  Agent.    Easton,  152.
Bechtel,  Jacob,  Clerk.    Tyler,  Barger,  333.
Bechtel,  John  Y.,  Hotel  Proprietor.  Treasurer,  Barger,  333;  Lilly  chap.,
181 ;  De  Molay  com.,  10.
24

--- Sayfa 376 ---
364  world's  masonic  register.
Byers,  Charles  E.,  Contractor.     Barger,  333.
Cooper,  Charles  W.,  Cashier  Allentown  Bank.    Barger,  333.
Deshler,  D.  J.  F.,  Parmer.     Barger,  333  ;  Lilly  chap.,  181.
Dubs,  A.  J.  G.,  Minister  of  the  Gospel.     Worshipful  Master,  Barger,  333.
Dubs,  J.  Henry,  Clergyman.     Barger,  333.
Gausler,  William  H.,  Lumber  Dealer.     Porter,  284.
Goundee,  John  P.     Barger,  333.
Grim,  Bphraim,  Grain  Dealer  and  Flour  Factor.    Barger,  333.
Heist,  Charles  K.,  Clerk.     Barger,  333.
Heller,  Peter,  Livery  and  Omnibus  Proprietor.    Lehigh,  326.
Herrmann,  C.  F.,  Professor  of  Music  and  Dealer  in  Music.     Porter,  284.
Housman,  Boas,  Clerk  of  the  Court.     J.  W.,  Barger,  333.
Keck,  C.  A.  G.,  Hat  and  Cap  Store,  25  West  Hamilton  St.  Barger,  333 ;
Lilly  chap.,  181.
Kern,  Leopold,  Inn-keeper.     Lehigh,  326.
Kline,  Charles,  Merchant.    Barger,  333  ;  Lilly  chap.,  181.
Kramer,  J.  A.,  Butcher.    Barger,  333.
Kramer,  Milton  J.,  Merchant.    Barger,  333 ;  Lilly  chap.,  181.
Krause,  D.  M.,  Liquor  Dealer.     Carbon,  242 ;  Lilly  chap.,  181.
Lawell,  J.  D.,  Magistrate.    Barger,  333;  Lilly  chap.,  181.
Martin,  Edwin  G.,  Medical  Doctor.    Barger,  333.
Marx,  Wm.  S.,  Attorney  at  Law.     Barger,  333.
Mickley,  Charles,  Grain  Dealer  and  Flour  Factor.     Barger,  333.
Newhard,  J.  F.,  Hotel  Proprietor,  Allen  House.    Barger,  333.
Oliver,  John  H,  Attorney  at  Law.     Porter,  284.
Price,  Simeon  H,  Cabinet-maker.  Barger,  333 ;  Lilly  chap.,  181 ;  De  Molay
com.,  10.
Ruhe,  George  L.,  Tobacconist.    Porter,  284.
Runk,  Charles  M.,  Attorney  at  Law.    Barger,  333.
Saeger,  Henry  J.,  Banker  and  Broker.     Barger,  333  ;  Lilly  chap.,  181.
Schall,  George  B.,  Attorney  at  Law.  Lehigh,  326  ;  Lilly  chap.,  181 ;  De
Molay  com.,  10.
Shimer,  R.  S.,  Hardware  Dealer.    Barger,  333.
Smith,  Franklin,  Auctioneer.     Reading,  62  ;  Reading  chap.,  152.
Weil,  William  S.,  Merchant.     Keystone,  271 ;  Girard  Mark,  214.
Weiser,  Nelson,  Bookseller  and  Publisher.     Secretary,  Barger,  333.
Woolever,  Adam,  Attorney  at  Law.    Porter,  284.
ALTOOETA.
Barlow,  Isaac,  Conductor  Pass.  Train  Penna.  Railroad.  Perseverance,  21 ;
Perseverance  chap.,  21.
Clark,  Rev.  A.  B.,  Pastor  First  Presbyterian  Church.  P.  M.,  Mountain,  281 ;
Mount  Moriah  chap.,  166  ;  Mountain  coun.,  9 ;  P.  E.  C,  Mountain  com.,  10.
Cramer,  Geo.  B.,  Master  of  Transportation.  W.  M.,  Mountain,  281;  Mount-
ain chap.,  189  ;  Mountain  coun.,  9  ;  Mountain  com.,  10.
Domer,  Wm.,  Clerk,  Engineer's  Office  of  Penna.  Railroad.  Philanthropy,
225  ;  Greensburg  chap.,  192.
Dougherty,  John  L.,  Bridge  Builder.    Mountain,  281 ;   Mountain  chap.,  189.

--- Sayfa 377 ---
PENNSYLVANIA.  365
Finley,  Dr.  "Win.  R.,  Physician.     Juniata,  282  ;  Mountain  chap.,  189.
Pox,  Isaac,  Car  Inspector  on  Penna.  Railroad.  Mountain,  281 ;  Mountain
chap.,  189;  Mountain  coun.,  9.
Hall,  L.  W.,  Senator.     Mountain,  281.
Hostetter,  0.  R,  Foreman  of  Car  Shop  Penna.  Railroad.  Mountain,  281 ;
Mountain  chap.,  189 ;  Mountain  coun.,  9  ;  Mountain  com.,  10.
Kerr,  R.  A.  0.,  Merchant.  Mountain,  281 ;  Sec,  Mountain  chap.,  189 ;  Rec,
Mountain  coun.,  9 ;  Rec,  Mountain  com.,  10.
Levan,  John  P.,  Car  Builder  Penna.  Railroad  Shop.  Mountain,  281 ;  Mount-
ain chap.,  189;  Mountain  coun.,  9 ;  Mountain  com.,  10.
Long,  Geo.  H.,  Contractor.    Lewistown,  203 ;  Mountain  chap.,  189.
Maxwell,  A.  H.,  Foreman  of  Brass  Foundery.  Mountain,  281 ;  Scribe,
Mountain  chap.,  189 ;  P.  C.  of  W.,  Mountain  coun.,  9 ;  C.  Gen.,  Mountain
com.,  10.  >
Piper,  Colonel  John  L.,  Foreman  of  Bridge  Department  Penna.  Railroad.
Mountain,  281 ;  Mountain  chap.,  189.
Potts,  Gen.  G.,  Tonnage  Master  Penna.  Railroad.  Portage,  220  ;  P.  H.  P.,
Mount  Moriah,  166  ;  Mountain  coun.,  9  ;  Mountain  com.,  10.
Rose,  Benjamin  F.,  Chief  Clerk  Trans.  Dept.  Penna.  Railroad.  Secretary,
Mountain,  281 ;  Mountain  chap.,  189  ;  Mountain  com.,  10.
Shoemaker,  John,  Postmaster  and  Store-keeper.    Treasurer,  Mountain,  281 ;
Treasurer,  Mountain   chap.,  189 ;    Treasurer,   Mountain  coun.,  9 ;   Treasurer,
Mountain  com.,  10.
Shoomaker,  Wm,  Printer.     Mountain,  281.
Turner,  E.  H.,  General  Car  Inspector,  Penna.  Railroad.  Mountain,  281 ;
P.  H.  P.,  Mountain  chap.,  189  ;  P.  T.  I.  G.  M.,  Mountain  coun.,  9 ;  P.  B.  C,
Mountain  com.,  10.
Vauclain,  A.  C,  Master  Mechanic.     Phoenix,  130  ;  C.  of  H.,  Mountain  chap.,
189;  Mountain  coun.,  9;  Mountain  com.,  10.
Wells,  James  B.,  Engineer  Penna.  Railroad.    Mountain,  281.
Woods,  John,  Hotel-keeper.     Mountain,  281 ;  Mountain  chap.,  189  ;  Moun-
tain coun.,  9 ;  Mountain  com.,  10.
ASHLAND,  Schuylkill  County.
Adams,  Hamilton,  Inn-keeper.     Minersville,  222  ;  P.  H.  P.,  Schuylkill  chap.,
159.
Bancroft,  Alfred,  Manager.     Ashland,  294.
Bancroft,  J.  W.,  Coal  Operator.     Ashland,  294.
Bensinger,  Elijah,  Inn-keeper.     Schuylkill,  138  ;  Schuylkill  chap.,  159.
Camp,  Samuel,  Carpenter.    J.  W.,  Ashland,  294.
Christian,  Wm.  A.,  Moulder.     Ashland,  294.
Conner,  James  J.,  Coal  Operator.    W.  M.,  Ashland,  294.
Dye,  Martin,  Clerk.    Ashland,  294.
Eltingham,  John,  Superintendent  of  Coal  Mines.     Ashland,  294.
Fregellas,  Henry,  Blacksmith.     Chaplain,  Ashland,  294.
Garner,  John  O,  Merchant.     Ashland,  294.
Garner,  Joseph  W.,  Founder.    Ashland,  294.
Helfrich,  George  H.,  Clerk.    Ashland,  294.

--- Sayfa 378 ---
366  world's  masonic  register.
Manley,  Wesley,  Coach-maker.    Ashland,  294.
McKibbin,  David  J.,  M.D.     P.  M.,  Ashland,  294 ;  Girard  chap.,  Phila.
Mock,  Mahlon  M.,  Clerk.     Ashland,  294.
Moodie,  William  J.,  Clerk.     Secretary,  Ashland,  294.
Morris,  Daniel,  Livery.     Ashland,  294.
Sears,  Rev  S.  W.    Eureka,  302,  Mechanicsburg.
Spinney,  Albion  P.,  Attorney  at  Law.     S.  W.,  Ashland,  294.
Walter,  A.  R.,  Merchant.    Treasurer,  Ashland,  294.
Wilson,  James  B.,  Lumber  Merchant.     Ashland,  294.
Wilson,  R.  C,  Lumber  Merchant.     P.  M.,  Ashland,  294 ;  Schuylkill  chap.,
159.
Yocum,  J.  H.,  M.D.    P.  M.,  Ashland,  294.
ATHENS,  Bradford  County.
Baird,  H.  C,  Attorney  and  Justice  of  the  Peace.  W.  M.,  Rural  Amity,  70 ;
Union  chap.,  161.  '
Fritcher,  Wm.  H.,  Variety  Store.     Secretary,  Rural  Amity,  70.
Phelps,  H.  A.,  Proprietor  American  House.    J.  D.,  Rural  Amity,  70.
Sloan,  John  S.,  Proprietor  Exchange  Hotel.  Initiated  a.l.  5805  in  Eastern
Star,  4,  Vermont ;  Royal  Arch  Mason.
Spalding,  A.  H,  Parmer  and  Dealer  in  Staves.     Rural  Amity,  70.
Stone,  Aaron,  Express  Messenger  to  Waverly.    Tyler,  Rural  Amity,  70.
AUBURN,  Schuylkill  County.
Berntheisel,  Josiah,  Clerk.    Iowa,  2,  Iowa.
Jones,  Wellington,  Railroad  Agent.     Chandler,  227,  Reading.
Koch,  Daniel,  Farmer.    Schuylkill,  138.
BETHLEHEM.
Borhek,  Frederick  R.,  Boot  and  Shoe  Maker,  residence,  S.  Main  St.  J.  W.,
Bethlehem,  283.
Clader,  Franklin,  Blacksmith.    Tyler,  Bethlehem,  283.
Knauss,  Henry  C,  Merchant.    Bethlehem,  283.
Leibert,  R.  W.,  Book-keeper  Lehigh  Zinc  Works.  Worshipful  Master,  Beth-
lehem, 283.
EIBMIN&HAM.
Berg,  Daniel,  Postmaster  and  Hardware  Merchant.     Monongahela,  269.
Fisher,  G.  W.,  Shoe  Manufacturer.     Milnor,  287.
McKnight,  Joseph,  Iron  Manufacturer.  Monongahela,  269 ;  Zerubbabel
chap.,  162  ;  Washington  coun.,  1.
Patterson,  Nathaniel,  Surveyor  and  Civil  Engineer.  W.  M.,  Monongahela,
269.
Welker,  Berhard,  Sand  Merchant.     Monongahela,  269.
BLOOMSBURG,  Columbia  County.
Edgar,  Thomas  W.,  Planing  and  Steam  Saw-mill.     Washington,  265.
Guinn,  George,  Wheelwright.     S.  W.,  Washington,  265  ;   Catawissa  chap.,
178  ;  Treasurer,  Mount  Moriah  coun.,  10 ;  Sentinel,  Crusade  com.,  12.

--- Sayfa 379 ---
PENNSYLVANIA.  367
Hagenbuck,  Eobert,  Inn-keeper.    P.  Treasurer,  Washington,  265.
Harrison,  Francis  0.,  M.D.  P.  M.,  Washington,  265;  P.  K.,  Catawissa
chap.,  178;  P.  0.  of  W.,  Mount  Moriah  coun.,  10  ;  P.  Com.,  Ortisade  com.,  12.
Knapp,  Christian  P.,  Mason.  P.  M.,  Washington,  265  ;  Oatawissa  chap.,
178 ;  P.  Thr.  111.  G.  M.,  Mount  Moriah  coun.,  10 ;  R.  and  S.  M. ;  P.  E.  Cora.,
Crusade  com.,  12 ;  111.  G.  M.  of  the  Grand  Coun. ;  R.  and  S.  M.  of  Pa. ;  R.  B.
Grand  Com.  of  the  Grand  Com.  of  Pa.
Lutz,  Ephraim  P.,  Druggist.  P.  M.,  Washington,  265;  Catawissa  chap.,
178;  111.  G.  M.,  Mount  Moriah  coun.,  10;  R.  and  S.  M.;  P.  Recorder,  Crusade
com.,  12.
McKelvy,  James  B.,  M.D.  P.  M.,  Washington,  265  ;  P.  H.  P.,  Catawissa
chap.,  178;  P.  Thr.  111.  G.  M.,  Mount  Moriah  coun.,  10;  P.  E.  Com.,  Crusade
com.,  12.
Mensch,  Andrew  C,  Notary  Public.     P.  S.  D.,  Washington,  265  ;  P.  C.  H.,
Catawissa    chap.,   178;    P.   Recorder,    Mount    Moriah    coun.,   10;    Crusade
com.,  12.
BBACKNEY.
Lewis,  A.  H.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.     Warren,  240.
BEIDEBBUBO.
Davies,  Charles  C,  Machinist.    Prankford,  292.
BBISTOL.
Dungan,  Pugh,  Wine  Merchant.     P.  M.,  Bristol,  25. ;  Mark  Mason.
BBOWETSVILLE.
Mason,  J.  M.,  Steam  Boat  Commander.  Brownsville,  60  ;  Brownsville  chap.;
Brownsville  coun.
CATAWISSA,  Columbia  County.
Kreigh,  J.  C,  Merchant.     Danville,  224 ;  Treasurer,  Catawissa  chap.,  178.
McWilliams,  Hugh,  Car  Builder.  J.  D.,  Danville,  224 ;  M.,  Catawissa  chap.,
178.
Sharpless,  John,  Merchant.  Danville,  224;  Catawissa  chap.,  178 ;  Crusade
com.,  12.
Smeed,  E.  C,  Civil  Engineer.     S.  W.,  Danville,  224;    H.  P.,   Catawissa
chap.,  178 ;  S.  W.,  Crusade  com.,  12 ;  Grd.  of  the  Grand  Council ;  P.  J.  W.  of
Grand  Command  ery.
CEBES,  McKean  County.
Barber,  Elmer  D.,  Carpenter  and  Joiner,  and  Hotel-keeper.    Macedonia,  258,
N.  Y.
Gillett,  G.  B.,  Merchant.    Macedonia,  258,  N.  Y.
Perkins,  Benjamin,  Farmer  and  Mason.     Macedonia,  258,  N.  Y.
COLEBBOOK,  Lebanon  County.
Kelly,  Clinton  B.,  Farmer.     Mount  Lebanon,  226.
COLUMBIA.
Boice,  Erastus  K.,  Freight  and  Ticket  Agent  P.  Railroad  Co.  P.  M.,
Columbia,  286  ;  Chap.,  43.

--- Sayfa 380 ---
3G8  -world's  masonic  register.
Eberlein,  Samuel  P.,  Grocer,  71  Locust  St.  Sec  ,  Columbia,  286 ;  Chap.,  43 ;
J.  W.,  Columbia  com.,  13.
Frederick,  Lewis,  Hat  and  Shoe  Store,  2  Mechanics'  Row,  Locust  St.  J.  D.,
Columbia,  286 ;  Chap.,  43.
Pry,  H.  H.,  Merchant,  opposite  Columbia  Bank,  Locust  St.     Columbia,  286.
Kauffman,  C.  S.,  Proprietor  Cordelia  Furnace,  near  Columbia.  W.  M.,
Columbia,  286  ;  Chap.,  43;  E.  C,  Columbia  com.,  13.
Kimburg,  Peter  A.,  Machinist  Pa.  Railroad  Shop.  P.  M.,  Columbia,  286 ;
Chap.,  43.
COLUMBUS.
Burroughs,  F.  E.,  M.D.  W.  M.,  Columbus,  264 ;  Western  Star  chap.,  67,
N.  Y.
Mason,  L.  W.,  Merchant.     Columbus,  264 ;  Western  Star  chap.,  67,  N.  T.
Stacey,  Nathaniel,  Clergyman.  Hamilton,  120,  N.  Y. ;  Western  Star  chap.,
67,  N.  Y. ;  New  Jerusalem  com.,  Danby,  N.  Y.
CKESSONA,  Schuylkill  County.
Bines,  W.  H.,  Civil  Engineer.  P.  M.,  Friendship,  89,  Zanesville,  Ohio;  P.
H.  P.,  Zanesville  chap.,  Ohio ;  P.  E.  C,  Wheeling  com.,  Virginia.
Hazel,  Henry,  Machinist.     S.  W.,  Page,  270.
Hudson,  Richard,  Engineer.     Page,  270.
Keefer,  John,  Founderyman.     W.  M.,  Page,  270.
Morrisey,  Timothy,  Machinist  and  Engineer.  Stichter,  62 ;  Reading  chap.,
152  ;  Jerusalem  com.,  16.
Smith,  William,  Engineer.     Page,  270 ;  Schuylkill  chap.,  159.
Upchurch,  John,  Master  Mechanic.     Page,  270 ;  Schuylkill  chap.,  159.
DADTVUiLE,  Montour  County.
Brown,  G.  B.,  Bookseller  and  Stationer.     Danville,  224.
Johnston,  William  C,  Attorney  at  Law.     P.  Sec,  Danville,  224.
Lewis,  William,  Boss  Roller.    Danville,  224.
Moore,  Robert,  Assistant  Judge.     Danville,  224.
Oppenheimer,  Rev.  Emanuel.     Danville,  224.
Ridgway,  M.  S.,  Superintendent  of  Iron  Works.     Danville,  224.
Stroh,  Samuel,  Assistant  Superintendent  of  Iron  Works.     W.  M.,  Danville,
224.
Voris,  A.  H.,  Book-keeper.    J.  W.,  Danville,  224.
DIMOCK.
Babcock,  P.  S.,  Farmer.    Warren,  240.
Dennisou,  G.  M.,  Farmer.    Warren,  240.
Gates,  E.  B.,  Hotel-keeper.    Warren,  240.
D  O  WHTBTGTOWM'.
Black,  Samuel,  Merchant  Tailor.     Treasurer,  Williamson,  309;   Columbia
Mark,  91.
Williamson  Lodge,  309,  instituted  October  19th,  1857.

--- Sayfa 381 ---
PENNSYLVANIA.  369
EASTOET.
Prey,  Martin,  Merchant.     Easton,  152  ;  Easton  chap.,  173.
.    Lehr,  Enos,  Merchant.    Easton,  152  ;  Easton  chap.,  173.
Miller,  A.,  (0.)  Cooper.    Easton,  152  ;  Easton  chap.,  173 ;  St.  John's  com.,  4.
Neiman,  D.  H.,  Editor  and  Proprietor  of  Easton  Sentinel.  Easton,  152  ;
Easton  chap.,  173.
Pyle,  Robert  0.,  Merchant.     Easton,  152  ;  Easton  chap.,  173.
Semple,  William  B.,  Merchant.  W.  M.,  Easton,  152  ;  Easton  chap.,  173 ;  St.
John's  com.,  4.
Stout,  Lewis  H.,  Attorney  at  Law.     Easton,  152  ;  Easton  chap.,  173 ;  St.
John's  com.,  4.
EBIE,  Erie  County.
Brown,  W.  S.,  Agent  Lake  Shore  Railroad.     Presque  Isle,  235.
Elliott,  0.  L.,  Dentist.     Presque  Isle,  235.
Faulkner,  Robt.,  Surgeon  and  Homoeopathic  Physician.  Secretary,  Presque
Isle,  235 ;  Predonia  chap.,  76,  N.  Y.
Forrester,  Rev.  J.  E.,  D.D.  W.  M.,  Presque  Isle,  235  ;  Predonia  chap.,  76,  N.  T.
Pelton,  Halsey,  City  Councilman,  Lime  Manufacturer,  and  Merchant.  P.  M.,
Presque  Isle,  235  ;  Predonia  chap.,  76,  N.  Y.
Reed,  Wm.  L.,  Civil  Engineer  and  Superintendent  Erie  Extension  Canal.
Presque  Isle,  235.
Schneider,  Fred.,  Soap  and  Candle  Manufacturer.    Presque  Isle,  235.
FBABTKFOBD.
Faunce,  Daniel,  Hotel.     Prankford,  292  ;  Excelsior  Mark,  216.
Lindouer,  Christian,  Ostler.     Prankford,  292.
Myers,  Elijah  E.,  Builder.  P.  Secretary,  Central,  71,  Illinois;  Springfield
chap.,  1,  111.
Patterson,  John,  Calico  Printer,  Orchard  St.  Prankford,  292  ;  Excelsior
Mark,  216.
Weber,  Jacob,  Hotel.     Frankford,  292  ;  Excelsior  Mark,  216.
EBIENDSVILLE.
Glidden,  Col.  B.,  Justice.    Warren,  240.
GALLITZIET.
Scott,  Abram  B.,  Conductor  Penna.  Railroad.    Mountain,  281.
GOBDOH",  Schuylkill  County.
Bachman,  Jonathan,  Sup't  of  Ashland  Plains.     Ashland,  294.
Faust,  Jonathan,  Keeper  of  Union  Hotel.    Ashland,  294.
Parton,  Henry,  Blacksmith.    Ashland,  294.
GBEAT  BEND,  Susquehanna  County.
Dusenbury,  J.  H.,  Merchant.  W.  M.,  Great  Bend,  338  ;  P.  M.,  Franklin,
263  ;  Binghamton  chap.,  139,  N.  Y. ;  Malta  com.,  21,  N.  Y.
Hays,  Thomas  D.,  Railroad  Contractor  and  Agriculturalist.  Treasurer,
Great  Bend,  338.

--- Sayfa 382 ---
370  world's  masonic  register.
Orange,  Geo.  W.,  Station  Agent  N.  Y.  and  B.  Railroad.  S.  W.,  Great
Bend,  338.
Simrell,  Wm.  W.,  Foreman  D.  L.  and  W.  Eailroad  Repairing  Shops.  J.  D.,
Great  Bend,  338.
Stephens,  A.  P.,  Commission  Agent  and  Agriculturalist.     S.  D.,  Great
Bend,  338.
HASEBTJBG-,  Berks  County.
Baum,  P.  0.,  Merchant.     Stichter,  62.
Geiger,  Jacob,  Miller.    Tamaqua,  238.
HOLLIDATTSBTJBG.
Crawford,  J.  R.,  Gentleman.  P.  M.,  Juniata,  282  ;  P.  H.  P.,  Mount  Moriah
chap.,  166  ;  Altoona  conn.,  9  ;  Mountain  com.,  10.
Punk,  James,  High  Sheriff  of  Blair  Co.  Jnniata,  282  ;  Mount  Moriah  chap.,
166  ;  Altoona  coun.,  9  ;  Mountain  com.,  10.
Gilmore,  John  M.,  Clerk.  Portage,  220 ;  Mount  Moriah  chap.,  166  ;  Altoona
coun.,  9 ;  Mountain  com.,  10.
Koehler,  Dr.  Charles,  Physician.    Portage,  220.
Lingafelt,  John,  Merchant  and  County  Treasurer.  Portage,  220;  Mount
Moriah  chap.,  166.
Sheonthal,  Moses,  Merchant.    Juniata,  282.
Stewart,  James  R.,  Engineer  Hoi.  Br.  Penna.  Railroad.    Juniata,  282.
Vowinkle,  A.,  Chandler.     Portage,  220;  Warren  chap.,  180;  Altoona  coun.,
9 ;  Mountain  com.,  10.
HOLMESBTTBG.
Cartledge,  Joseph,  Millwright.    Frankford,  292  ;  Excelsior  Mark,  216.
Dewees,  Jacob  H.,  Merchant.     Frankford,  292.
Graff,  Jerome,  Gardener.     Kensington,  211.
Willian,  John  B.,  Manufacturer.     Frankford,  292.
KINGSTON,  Luzerne  County.
Tarbox,  Joseph  Lafayette,  Foreman  in  laying  and  repairing  Track.    Union,
291.
LANCASTER.
Atlee,  John  L.,  Jr.,  M.D.,  74  E.  King  St.  W.  M.,  Lodge,  43 ;  H.  P.,  Chap.,
43.
Atlee,  Wm.  Aug.,  Attorney  at  Law,  45  E.  King  St.  J.  W.,  Lodge,  43;  P.
H.  P.,  Chap.,  43 ;  D.  D.  G.  H.  P.  of  G.  C.  for  Lancaster  and  York  Counties.
Heistand,  J.  Christian,  Miller,  Lancaster  Co.     Lodge,  43.
Kline,  George  M.,  Attorney  at  Law,  12  N.  Duke  St.  S.  W.,  Lodge,  43 ;
Scribe,  P.  A,  Chap.,  43.
Long,  Reuben  H.,  Attorney  at  Law.     Lodge,  43.
Swentzel,  E.  W.,  D.D.S.,  60£  N.  Queen  St.    J.  D.,  Lodge,  43.
Westhaeffer,  J.  M.,  Bookseller,  Publisher,  and  Stationer,  44  N.  Queen,  cor.  of
Orange  St.     Sec,  Lodge,  43  ;  Sec,  Chap.,  43 ;  Recorder,  Columbia  com.,  13.
LEWISBUBG.
Bearstecker,  F.,  Gunsmith.     Charity,  144.
Brewer,  C.  D.,  Miller.     Charity,  144.

--- Sayfa 383 ---
PENNSYLVANIA.  371
Caldwell,  F.  S.,  Druggist.    Charity,  144.
Crites,  Charles  S.,  Architect  and  Builder.    W.  M.,  Charity,  144.
Dunkle,  Charles  C,  Merchant.     Charity,  144.
Goodman,  Philip,  Merchant.    Charity,  144.
Herman,  Saml.,  Tailor.     Charity,  144.
McLaughlin,  J.  B.,  Book-keeper.    Secretary,  Charity,  144.
Nogle,  Wm.,  Lumberman  and  Boat  Builder.     Charity,  144.
Stahl,  Jeremiah,  Farmer.     Charity,  144.
Wetzel,  Charles  S.,  Architect  and  Builder.    Charity,  144.
LLEWELLYU,  Schuylkill  County.
Chance,  Hiram.    Minersville,  222 ;  Schuylkill  chap.,  159.
Klopp,  Benneville,  Merchant.    Minersville,  222  ;  Schuylkill  chap.,  159.
Troutman,  A.  T.,  Inn-keeper.     Swatara,  267  ;  Schuylkill  chap.,  159.
MAWAXUITK.
Bowker,  James,  Copper,  Tin,  and  Sheet  Iron  Worker,  Main  St.  Roxborough,
135.
Dykes,  James,  Manager  of  Falls  of  Schuylkill  Print  Works.  P.  M.,  Rox-
borough,  135 ;  Chap.,  91.
MAKIETTA,  Lancaster  County.
Hinkle,  Dr.  F.     Columbia,  286 ;  Chap.,  43  ;  Columbia  com.,  13.
MATJCH  CHUNK!.
Barney,  Nathan,  Book-keeper.     Carbon,  242.
Butler,  Robert  Q.,  Prothonotary,  Clerk  of  Quarter  Sessions  and  Oyer  and
Terminer  of  Carbon  County.     Carbon,  242  ;  Lilly  chap.,  181.
Connor,  Eli  T.     Carbon,  242.
Cooper,  J.  L.,  Postmaster.     Carbon,  242  ;  Lilly  chap.,  181.
Houston,  James,  Boat  Builder.  P.  M.,  Carbon,  242 ;  Scribe,  Lilly  chap.,
181 ;  Allen  encpt.,  20.
Kellem,  Samuel  L.,  Magistrate.    W.  M.,  Carbon,  242  ;  Lilly  chap.,  181.
Lentz,  La  Fayette,  Proprietor  Broadway  House.  Carbon,  242  ;  Lilly  chap.,
181.
Nimson,  Albright  B.,  Farmer.     Carbon,  242  ;  Lilly  chap.,  181.
Otis,  William  R.,  Watch-maker  and  Jeweler.  P.  M.,  Carbon,  242  ;  P.  H.  P.,
Lilly  chap.,  181 ;  D.  D.  G.  High  Priest,  2d  Generalissimo,  Allen  encpt.,  20.
McWILLIAMSTO  WN,  Chester  County.
Gilbough,  James  M.,  Carpenter.    Williamson,  309  ;  Columbia  Mark,  91.
MIDDLEPOBT.
Porter,  John  R.,  Magistrate.    Schuylkill,  138 ;  Mark  Master.
MIDWAY,  Chester  County.
Ash,  Wm.  R.,  Lumber  and  Coal  Merchant.    Williamson,  309.

--- Sayfa 384 ---
372  world's  masonic  register.
MILLFOBD,  Pike  County.
Newman,  John  B.,  Millwright.     Port  Jervis,  328,  N.  Y.
MINERSVILLE,  Schuylkill  County.
Benseman,  P.  T.,  Merchant.     Minersville,  222.     Schuylkill  chap.,  159.
Glover,  Eobert  A.,  Clerk.     Minersville,  222  ;  Schuylkill  chap.,  159.
Hopkins,  W.  H.,  Kailroad  Agent.     Minersville,  222  ;  Schuylkill  chap.,  159.
Lewis,  J.  W.,  Agent.    J.  W.,  Minersville,  222  ;  Schuylkill  chap.,  159.
Eobins,  W.  N.,  M.D.     P.  M.,  Minersville,  222  ;  P.  H.  P.,  Schuylkill  chap.,
159  ;  D.  D.  G.  H.  P.,  Schuylkill  Co.
Verner,  Thomas,  Coal  Operator.     W.  M.,  Minersville,  222  ;  Schuylkill  chap.,
159
MONTROSE.
Cobb,  John  W.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.    Warren,  240.
Post,  Wm.  M  ,  Attorney  at  Law.     W.  M.,  Warren,  240 ;  Warren  chap.,  180.
Smith,  Alphonso  H.,  Books,  Stationery,  and  News  Dealer,  and  Agent  for
Masonic  Publications.     Warren,  240 ;  Warren  chap.,  180.
Tarbell,  John  S.,  Proprietor  Franklin  House.  Warren,  240 ;  Warren  chap.,
180;  P.-.  A.'.  C.\
Tyler,  M.  C,  Merchant  in  N.  Y.  City.     Warren,  240.
Wood,  Frank  D.,  Artist,  Ambrotypist,  etc.    Warren,  240.
MOUNT  CARMEL,  Schuylkill  County.
Biles,  Wm.,  Mason.     Shamokin,  255;  Northumberland  chap.,  174.
Fahrion,  Frederick,  Butcher.     Shamokin,  255.
Fisher,  John,  Carpenter.     Shamokin,  255.
Lerch,  Abraham,  Iun-keeper.     Shamokin,  255.
Lerch,  W.  H.,  Merchant.    Shamokin,  255;  Northumberland  chap.,  174.
Miller,  Isaac,  Inn-keeper.     Shamokin,  255  ;  Northumberland  chap.,  174.
MOUNT  JOY,  Lancaster  County.
Grider,  B.  M.,  Lumber  Merchant.     Lodge,  43.
HEW  CASTLE.
Lindamuth,  Jacob,  Hotel  Proprietor.  Member  of  A.  Y.  M.  Pulaski  Lodge,  216.
NEW  MILEORD.
Barnum,  Elijah,  Proprietor  New  Milford  Valley  Hotel.     Warren,  240.
Dickerman,  J.,  Jr.,  Merchant  and  Manufacturer.     Warren,  240.
Hayden,  John,  Wholesale  Yankee  Notions,  etc.  Warren,  240;  Warren
chap.,  180.
Hayden,  Wm.,  Wholesale  Yankee  Notions,  etc.    Rural  Amity,  70.
McMillan,  A.  P.,  Clerk.     Warren,  240.
Merrill,  C.  G.,  Station  Agent  and  Telegraph  Operator  T>.  L.  and  W.  Railroad.
Warren,  240.  .
Mott,  Sylvannus,  Farmer.     Clyde,  341,  N.  Y.
Ward,  Wm.  T.,  Merchant.     Warren,  240.
Weed,  Geo.  W.,  Merchant.    Otseningo,  435,  N.  Y. ;  Malta  com.,  21.

--- Sayfa 385 ---
PENNSYLVANIA.  373
NEWTOWN,  Bucks  County.
Feaster,  David  V.,  Iron  Founder  and  Machinist.    Bristol,  25.
Jenks,  George  A.,  Attorney  at  Law.     Columbia,  91 ;  Columbia  Mark,  91.
ORWIGSBUKG,  Schuylkill  County.
Hammer,  William  A.,  Merchant.     P.  M.,  Schuylkill,  138.
Schuylkill  Lodge,  138,  meets  Wednesday  on  or  before  full  moon.
Weber,  E.  K.,  M.D.     Schuylkill,  138.
PALO  ALTO,  Schuylkill  County.
Bensinger,  William,  Merchant.     Schuylkill,  138  ;  Schuylkill  chap.,  159.
Chillson,  Walters,  Master  Carpenter.     Pulaski,  216.
Harlan,  Charles,  Engineer.     Union,  48';  Elkton,  Md.
McDonnell,  Samuel,  Foreman  Phila,  and  R.  Railroad  Co.     Chandler,  227  ;
Beading  chap.,  152  ;  De  Molay  com.,  9.
Sessinger,  Henry  B.,  Clerk.     Pulaski,  216.
Snyder,  George  B.,  Clerk  P.  and  R.  Railroad.     Stichter,  62.
Starrett,  John,  Engineer  P.  and  R.  Railroad.     Chandler,  227.
Stellwagon,  W.  M.,  Machinist.     Schuylkill,  138  ;  Schuylkill  chap.,  159.
Wentz,  Jacob,  Clerk  P.  and  R.  Railroad.     Pulaski,  216.
PHILADELPHIA.
Anderson,  Robert,  8  Merrick  St.     Point  Coupe,  U.  D.,  Louisiana.
Baisley,  Wm.  C,  Wharf  Builder,  late  Crown  St.,  18th  Ward.  Shekinah,  246 ;
Girard  Mark,  214.
Banes,  William  Alexander,  Contractor,  1726  N.  2d  St.    Frankford,  292.
Bartram,  John  I.,  Wetherill  House,  603  Sansom  St.     Eastern  Star,  186.
Battin,  Henry  S.,  Tobacconist,  S.  E.  cor.  3d  and  Vine  Sts.,  residence,  840
Marshall  St.    Mitchell,  296.
Baxter,  Isaac  B.,  Jr.,  Wholesale  and  Retail  Hardware  Dealer,  522  S.  2d  St.
Solomon's,  114.
Beatty,  Thomas,  Merchant,  N.  3d  St.     Kensington,  211 ;  Columbia  Mark,  91.
Berry,  Casper  M.,  Dining  Rooms,  N.  E.  eor.  5th  and  Chestnut  Sts.,  also  16th
and  Market  Sts.    Integrity,  187  ;  Columbia  Mark,  91.
Blumenthal,  Moses,  Tailor,  548  N.  2d  St.     Kensington,  211.
Brady,  Mathew  J.,  Sash,  Blind,  Ripping  Mill,  61  Allen  St.  below  Shackamaxon,
residence,  1137  Shackamaxon  St.     Shekinah,  246  ;  Columbia  Mark,  91.
Brenner,  Henry  W.,  Bread  Baker,  1123  Otis  St.,  18th  Ward.  Integrity,  187 ;
Columbia  Mark,  91.
Brown,  John,  Hotel-keeper,  1215  Market  St.     St.  John's,  115.
Brown,  Samuel,  Machinist,  220  Allen  St.  St.  John's,  115  ;  Girard  Mark,  214  ;
Harmony  chap.,  52.
Brunswick,  Raphael,  Watch-maker  and  Jeweler,  605  N.  2d  St.  Kensington,
211.
Budd,  J.  Fletcher,  Collector  of  Taxes,  Columbia  St.,  above  American.  Ken-
sington, 211.
Buttler,  Henry  L.,  Job  and  Fancy  Printer,  S.  E.  cor.  of  2d  and  Market  Sts.
Integrity,  187  ;  Girard  Mark,  214.

--- Sayfa 386 ---
374  world's  masonic  register.
Christian,  Henry,  Sup't  Eepairs  Phila.  &  R.  Railroad  Co.'s  "Wharves,  Port
Richmond.  J.  W.  and  Charter  Member,  Stichter,  254 ;  P.  M.,  Richmond,  230 ;
Harmony  chap.,  52  ;  Jerusalem  com.,  15 ;  Philadelphia  conn.,  11.
Coffee,  E.  Z.,  Morocco  Manufacturer,  1143  N.  4th  St.,  store,  No.  5  N.  3d  St.
Shekinah,  246.
Connelly,  John  G.,  Hotel-keeper,  527  Chestnut  St.  St.  John's,  115  ;  Girard
Mark,  214.
Cooke,  B.  J.,  Clock  Manufacturer,  827  Ellsworth  St.  Richmond,  230;
Columbia  Mark,  91.
Crozier,  William,  Stone-mason,  1411  N.  4th  St    Lodge,  3.
Davis,  Samuel  H.,  Manufacturer  Spokes,  Hubs,  and  Felloes,  1028, 1030,  and
1032  N.  Front  St.     Phoenix,  130.
Elder,  William  S.,  Tobacconist,  1029  N.  2d  St.  Frankford,  292;  Excelsior
Mark,  216.
Fichtel,  Charles,  Watch-maker  and  Jeweler,  518  S.  2d  St.  Meridian  Sun,  158.
Fisher,  Leonard,  Hotel,  1115  Market  St.   Solomon's,  1 14 ;  Jerusalem  chap.,  3.
Flomerfelt,  Armstrong  J.,  212  Catharine  St.     Integrity,  187.
Funk,  Francis,  Agent  Pennsylvania  Transportation  Co.,  137  Dock  St.  S.  W.,
Meridian  Sun,  158 ;  Girard  Mark,  114 ;  Columbia  chap.,  91 ;  Philadelphia
coun.,  11 ;  Warder,  St.  John's  com.,  4 ;  R.  P.  G.  Treas.,  Grand  Coun.,  Pa.
Gicker,  C.  B.,  Flour,  Feed,  Grain,  and  Hay  Store,  Frankford  Road,  above
Norris  St.    Richmond,  230  ;  Harmony  chap.,  52.
Gill,  John  S.,  Carpenter,  1110  Frankford  Road.    Kensington,  211.
Gilroy,  H.  E.,  Minister  of  the  Gospel,  1010  N.  Front  St.     Pulaski,  216.
Gross,  Ernest,  6  S.  Water  St.,  residence,  N.  E.  cor.  12th  and  Oliver  Sts.
Herman,  125 ;  Columbia  Mark,  91.
Hailer,  David,  Carpenter,  415  Rugan  St.,  residence,  640  Wayne  St.  Rising
Star,  126.
Hall,  Samuel  P.,  Attorney  at  Law,  office,  128  S.  6th  St.,  residence,  1768
Frankford  Road.    Lodge,  3.
Heintish,  William  A.,  Machinist,  1232  Cass  St.  Rising  Star,  126  ;  Columbia
Mark,  91.
Hemphill,  Joseph,  Painter,  264  Thompson  St.  Kensington,  211 ;  Girard
Mark,  214.
Heppe,  P.  H.,  Accountant,  506  N.  3d  St.   Herman,  125  ;  Columbia  Mark,  91.
Hershey,  D.,  M.D.,  994  N.  5th  St.     Frankford,  292  ;  Girard  Mark,  214.
Hill,  Charles,  Plumber,  1229  Shackamaxon  St.  Richmond,  230  ;  Columbia
Mark,  91.
Hollowell,  William,  Carpenter,  1048  N.  Front  St.    Lodge,  3.
Holmes,  John,  Inn-keeper,  S.  W.  cor.  Front  and  Thompson  Sts.  Kensington,
211.
Hooper,  Emanuel,  Glover,  722  Belgrade  St.    Kensington,  211.
Hutchinson,  Robert,  Alderman,  1416  Coates  St.,  residence,  1838  Green  St.
Sec,  Concordia,  67;  P.  H.  P.,  Columbia  chap.,  91.
Hyneman,  Isaac,  Contractor,  431  N.  8th  St.     Lafayette,  71.
Jacoby,  P.  Stephen,  Cooper,  Rising  Sun.     Kensington,  211.
Johnson,  John,  Rope-maker,  Germantown  Road,  near  Water  Works.  Rich-
mond, 230.

--- Sayfa 387 ---
PENNSYLVANIA.  375
Kelly,  James,  Supervisor  9th  and  10th  Wards.  St.  John's,  115 ;  Girard
Mark,  214;  Chap.,  3.
Kennedy,  Dr.  Alfred  L.,  President  Polytechnic  College,  Market  St.  and
West  Penn  Square.     Eising  Star,  126.
King,  John,  Waterman,  Eichmond,  above  Vienna  St.,  18th  Ward.  Frank-
ford,  292.  l
Krider,  John,  Gunmaker,  N.  E.  cor.  2d  and  Walnut  Sts.,  residence,  304
Wharton  St.    Solomon's,  114 ;  Girard  Mark,  214.
Ladner,  Frederick,  Brewer,  532  N.  3d  St.   Herman,  125  ;  Columbia  Mark,  91.
Ladner,  Louis  J.,  Inn-keeper,  532  N.  3d  St.     Concordia,  67.
Lare,  George  A.,  Ladies'  Gaiter,  Boot,  and  Shoe  Store,  411  S.  7th  St.,  five
doors  below  Pine  St.    Integrity,  187.
Lathbury,  James,  Baker,  517  Shippen  St.     Solomon's,  114.
Leach,  William,  Golden  Fleece  Hotel,  310  Cherry  St.  P.  M.,  Lodge,  9  ;  Tr.
Columbia  Mark,  91 ;  P.  H.  P.,  Colambia  chap.,  91.
Lewis,  Geo.  F.,  Plate-printer,  33  S.  3d  St.  P.  M.  Eastern  Star,  187;  Jeru-
salem chap.,  3.
Lockrey,  Charles,  Grocery  and  Provision  Store,  244  N.  15th,  cor.  Palmetto  St.
Meridian  Sun,  158  ;  Columbia  Mark,  91.
Ludy,  Christian,  Tanner,  N.  E.  cor.  Masher  and  Jefferson  Sts.  Kensington,
211 ;  Columbia  Mark,  91.
Mahan,  Francis,  Eeporter  of  Paris  and  Philadelphia  Fashions,  720  Chestnut
St.    Columbia,  91 ;  Girard  Mark,  214 ;  Columbia  chap.,  91.
Manning,  Napoleon  B.,  Wholesale  and  Eetail  Dealer  in  Imported  and  Do-
mestic Cigars  and  Tobacco,  41  S.  3d  St.     Lafayette,  71 ;  Girard  Mark,  214.
Mathers,  Charles,  Clerk,  1012  Marshall  St.     Solomon's,  114.
McCully,  Vincent  P.,  Flour  and  Grain  Merchant,  Germantown  Avenue,  below
5th  St.    P.  M.,  Kensington,  211;  Keystone  chap.,  175.
Nestor,  William  Andrew,  Farmer,  Germantown  Eoad,  near  Water  Works.
Kensington,  211.
Patterson,  John,  Hotel,  N.  W.  cor.  19th  and  South  Sts.  Montgomery,  19  ;
Columbia  Mark,  91.
Pote,  John  P.,  Hotel,  cor.  Eichmond  and  Otis  Sts.  Integrity,  187 ;  Columbia
Mark,  91.  '
Randall,  George  K.,  Stair-builder,  18th  and  Wood  Sts.  P.  M.,  Shekinah,
246 ;  Columbia  Mark,  91.
Randall,  Henry  D.,  Machinist,  311  Allen  St.  Shekinah,  246 ;  Columbia
Mark,  91.
Rheen,  Charles,  Lithographer,  42  S.  3d  St.     Orient,  289.
Ritchie,  Wm.,  Wine  and  Liquor  Store,  Otis  and  Girard  Avenue.  Kensing-
ton, 211.
Robinson,  James,  Watch-maker  and  Jeweler,  and  Importer  of  Clocks,
Watches,  and  all  kinds  of  Jewelry,  1031  Market  St.     Melita,  295.
Rowe,  Joseph  W.,  M.D.,  Germautown  Eoad  and  Thompson  St.  Shekinah,
246  ;  Excelsior  Mark,  216.
Ryan,  Charles,  1904  Lombard  St.     Eising  Star,  126.
Sailor,  John,  Contractor,  732  Shirley  St.    Harmony,  52 ;  Columbia  Mark,  91.
Shaffer,  John,  Contractor,  1229  S.  7th  St.  Frankford,  292;  Excelsior  Mark,
216.

--- Sayfa 388 ---
3?  6  world's  masonic  register.
Senior,  John  B.,  Bookseller,  224  N.  2d  St..     Melita,  295  ;  Girard  Mark,  214.
Smith,  Charles  M.,  Malt  and  Hops,  241  N.  4th  St.,  residence,  963  N.  6th  St.
Shekinah,  246.
Smith,   James,   Beal   Estate  Agent  and  Bookseller,  811  Passyunk  Road.
Shekinah,  246 ;  Columbia  Mark,  91.
Stockdale,  James  F.,  Broker.     Lodge,  2  ;  Keystone  chap.,  175.
Streeper,  John,  Jr.,  Carpenter  and  Builder  of  Vats,  Tubs,  etc.,  988  N.  5th  St.
Lodge,  3.
Sutpham,  L.  V.,  Carpenter  and  Builder,  250   Girard  Avenue.     Frankford,
292  ;  Excelsior  Mark,  216.
Taylor,  Absalom,  Clerk,  1336  Passyunk  Boad.     Pursuivant,  Melita,  295.
Thompson,  Hugh,  Plumber  and  Gas-fitter,  955  Frankford  Boad.  Shekinah,
246  ;  Girard  Mark,  214.
Tomlinson,  Geo.  W.,  Deputy  Sheriff,  848  Marshall  St.     Eising  Star,  126.
Trau,  J.  Ph.,  M.D.,  1327  N.  5th  St.     S.  W.,  Herman,  125  ;  Columbia  chap.,  91.
Vipond,  Thomas,  Brass  Smelter,  N.  6th,  above  Dauphin  St.  Kensington,
211;  Girard  Mark,  214.
Warburton,  William  F.,  Fashionable  Hatter,  430  Chestnut  St.  Eastern  Star,
186  ;  Harmony  chap.,  52.
Wartman,  Michael,  Tobacconist,  313  N.  3d  St.    Kensington,  211.
Wimpfheimer,  Jacob,  Leather  Dealer,  3d  and  Callowhill  Sts.   Kensington,  211.
Wise,  George  D.,  Photographic,  Ambrotypic,  and  Daguerreian  Gallery,  N.  E.
coi\  2d  and  Christian  Sts.    Washington,  59  ;  Columbia  Mark,  91.
Withinger,  Ralph,  Machinist,  1523  Apple  St.     Kensington,  211.
Wolf,  Charles  C,  Brewer,  213  N.  4th  St.    Mt.  Moriah,  155  ;  Girard  Mark,  214.
Wyle,  John  H.,  General  Commission  Merchant,  24  S.  Wharves.    Melita,  295.
Yost,  Jacob  A.,  Children's  Carriage  Manufacturer,  214  Dock  St.  St.  John's,
115  ;  Girard  Mark,  214.
PIBTEGKOVE,  Schuylkill  County.
Beohtel,  Henry  B.,  Tanner    Swatara,  267.
Clayton,  William,  Coal  Agent.     Swatara,  267.
Matchin,  George,  Attorney  at  Law.     Page,  270.
FITTSBTJBG.
Apple,  Adam,  Grocer,  West  Pittsburg.  Solomon,  231 ;  Zerubbabel  chap.,
162  ;  Washington  coun.,  1.
Armor,  George,  Merchant  Tailor.  Lodge,  45  ;  Zerubbabel  chap.,  162 ;  Pitts-
burg com.,  1.
Barne,  Thomas,  Jr.,  Iron  Safe  Manufacturer.     Washington,  253,
Bartberger,  Carl,  Architect  and  Superintendent.     St.  John's,  219.
Batchelor,  C.  W.,  Steamboat  Captain.  Washington,  253  ;  Zerubbabel  chap.,
162  ;  Washington  coun.,  1 ;  Pittsburg  com.,  1.
Bell,  A.  C,  Jr.,  Clerk  Penna.  Railroad  Co.     Lodge,  45.
Buffum,  J.  C,  Manufacturer  of  Sarsaparilla,  Mineral  Water,  and  Bottled  Ale
and  Porter.     St.  John's,  219.
Campbell,  Hugh,  Steamboat  Captain.  St.  John's,  219;  Zerubbabel  chap.,
162;  Washington  coun.,  ]  ;  Pittsburg  com.,  1.

--- Sayfa 389 ---
PENNSYLVANIA.  3TT
Colton,  Charles  A.,  Cashier  Dollar  Savings  Bank.     Lodge,  45.
Connor,  C,  Salesman.  P.  S.,  Milnor,  287 ;  Zerubbabel  chap.,  162  ;  Pittsburg
com.,  1.
Culbertson,  A.,  Grocer  and  Commission  Merchant.  P.  M.,  Franklin,  221 ;
Zerubbabel  chap.,  162  ;  Pittsburg  com.,  1.
Davage,  Thomas,  Block  and  Pump  Maker.  P.  M.,  St.  John's,  219  ;  P.  H.  P.,
Zerubbabel  chap.,  162  ;  P.  T.  I.  G.  M.,  Washington  coun.,  1 ;  Pittsburg  com.,  1.
Douglass,  T.  H.,  Steam  Boiler  Manufacturer.  St.  John's,  219 ;  Zerubbabel
chap.,  162 ;  Pittsburg  com.,  1.
Poster,  Heron  J.,  Editor  Daily  Dispatch.  St.  John's,  219  ;  Zerubbabel  chap.,
162.
Fulton,  A.,  Bell  and  Brass  Founder.  St.  John's,  219 ;  Zerubbabel  chap.,  162 ;
Pittsburg  com.,  1.
Gallinger,  N.,  Dry  Goods  Dealer.     Washington,  253.
Hailman.  J.  W.,  Iron  Manufacturer.  P.  M.,  Franklin,  221 ;  Zerubbabel  chap.,
162 ;  Pittsburg  com.,  1.
Henderson,  J.  P.,  Assistant  Treasurer  of  P.,  Ft.  W.,  and  C.  Eailroad  Co.
P.  Secretary,  Franklin,  227.
Herdman,  James,  Leather  Manufacturer.  P.  M.,  Milnor,  287 ;  Zerubbabel
chap.,  162.
Jones,  Hugh,  Merchant  and  Hardware  Dealer.     St.  John's,  219.
Kammerer,  D.  C,  Dealer  in  Boots  and  Shoes.     Milnor,  287.
Kelly,  Wm.  B.,  Lard  Oil  Manufacturer.     Lodge,  45  ;  Zerubbabel  chap.,  162.
Kennedy,  John  S.,  Watch-maker  and  Jeweler.     Washington,  253.
Matthews,  James,  Steamboat  Captain.     St.  John's,  219.
MeCandless,  Wilson,  Attorney  at  Law.  P.  M.,  Milnor,  287 ;  Zerubbabel
chap.,  162  ;  P.  T.  I.  G.  M.,  Washington  coun..  1.
Meeds,  Jas.  B.  D.,  Principal  of  Second  Ward  Public  Schools.  P.  M.,  St.
John's,  219 ;  Zerubbabel  chap.,  162.
Murphy,  Wm.  C,  Fancy  Goods  Dealer.     Lodge,  45.
Noble,  William,  Upholsterer.  P.  M.,  Lodge,  45  ;  Zerubbabel  chap.,  162  ;
P.  G.,  Pittsburg  com.,  1.
Olnhausen,  Christian.     P.  M.,  Solomon's,  231.
Parker,  Thomas  A.,  Salesman.     Milnor,  281.
Paulson,  Charles  H.,  Hat,  Cap,  and  Fur  Dealer.     Franklin,  221.
Pollock,  A.  M.,  M.D.  P.  M.,  Lodge,  45  ;  P.  H.  P.,  Zerubbabel  chap.,  162  ;
D.  D.  G.  M.
Rhoads,  James,  Painter.  P.  M.,  Lodge,  45  ;  R  A.  M. ;  E.  and  S.  Master ;
K.  T.
Rhodes,  Joshua,  Brewer.     St.  John's,  219  ;  Zerubbabel  chap.,  162.
Bosenbaum,  M.,  Clothier.     Washington,  253.
Schenck,  Frederick  G.,  Brewer.     W.  M.,  Solomon's,  231.
Schuchman,  William,  Lithographer.     Solomon's,  231.
Scriba,  Victor,  Printer.     P.  M.,  Solomon's,  231.
Severance,  L.,  Spike  and  Rivet  Manufacturer.     St.  John's,  219.
Silverman,  Charles,  Merchant.     St.  John's,  219.
Smyth,  Richard,  Book  Store.     Franklin,  221.
Spencer,  Edward,  Merchant  Tailor.    Lodge,  45.

--- Sayfa 390 ---
378  world's  masonic  register.
Staub,  Peter,  Shoemaker.     Solomon's,  231.
Vankirk,  "William,  Stove  Manufacturer.  Franklin,  221 ;  Zerubbabel  chap.,
162.
Warden,  "William  G.,  Engine  Builder.  Alleghany,  223 ;  Zerubbabel  chap.,
162  ;  Pittsburg  com.,  1.
Weldin,  J.  E.,  Dealer  in  Law  and  School  Books,  and  Manufacturer  of  Blank
Books.     St.  John's,  219  ;  Zerubbabel  chap.,  162  ;  Pittsburg  com.,  1.
"Whittier,  Isaac,  Secretary  and  Treasurer  of  Franklin  Savings  Bank  aDd  Loan
Association.    P.  M.,  St.  John's,  219  ;  Zerubbabel  chap.,  162  ;  Pittsburg  com.,  1.
"Williams,  John  "W.,  Puddler,  West  Pittsburg.  Lodge,  45  ;  Zerubbabel  chap.,
162.
Williams,  Robert,  Cabinet-maker  and  Undertaker.     Lodge,  45.
Wilson,  J.  0.,  Dry  Goods  Jobber.     Lodge,  45.
Wolf,  0.  H.,  Hardware  Merchant.  St.  John's,  219  ;  Zerubbabel  chap.,  162;
Pittsburg  com.,  1.
Wright,  Thos.  W.,  Printer,  Foreman  Daily  Dispatch.  Secretary,  Lodge,  45  ;
Secretary,  Zerubbabel  chap.,  162  ;  Washington  coun.,  1;  Pittsburg  com.,  1.
FITTSTON.
St.  John's  Lodge,  233,  meets  Tuesday  on  or  before  full  moon.
POBT  CLINTON,  Schuylkill  County.
Guldin,  William  C,  Coal  Agent.  Tamaqua,  238;  Tamaqua  chap.,  177;
Creigh  coun.,  16  ;  De  Molay  com.,  9.
Kirlin,  E.  J.,  Agent  C.  W.  &  E.  Railroad.  Schuylkill,  138 ;  ReadiDg  chap.,
152.
Siegfried,  John  R.,  Agent  L.  S.  Railroad.    Schuylkill,  138.
FOTTSVILLE,  Schuylkill  County.
Albright,  Charles,  Carriage-maker.     Pulaski,  216  ;  Chap.,  196.
Chambers,  Henry,  Merchant  Tailor,  Centre  St.    J.  W.,  Anthracite,  285.
Chichester,  E.,  M.D.,  Centre  St.     Pulaski,  216  ;  Schuylkill  chap.,  159.
Feger,  Joseph  M.,  Proprietor  Feger's  Hotel,  East  corner  of  Centre  and
Mahantonga  Sts.     Page,  270.
Hodgson,  William  D.,  Book-keeper.  S.  W.,  Pulaski,  216 ;  Mountain  City
chap.,  196.
Little,  Christopher,  Attorney  at  Law.  P.  M.,  Secretary,  Pulaski,  216  ;  Sec-
retary, Mountain  City  chap.,  196.
Whitfield,  Rowland,  Merchant,  Centre  St.    Secretary,  Anthracite,  285.
PROVIDENCE,  Luzerne  County.
Mulley,  Ambrose,  Merchant.     W.  M.,  Hiram,  261.
HEADING.
Dundore,  Franklin,  Book-keeper.     P.  M.,  Chandler,  227  ;  H.  R.  A.
Fritz,  Charles  L.,  Salesman.     P.  M.,  Chandler,  227,  Royal  Arch.
Orth,  Artenius,  Shoemaker.     Reading,  62.
Stevenson,  J.  V.  H.,  Merchant.  Reading,  62  ;  Reading  chap.,  152;  De  Molay
com.,  9.

--- Sayfa 391 ---
PENNSYLVANIA.  379
BIUGTOWIir,  Schuylkill  County.
Eisenhuth,  Bernhard,  Lumber  Merchant.    Ashland,  294;   Tamaqua  chap.,
177.
Kolb,  Philip,  Lumber  Merchant.     Tamaqua,  238 ;  Tamaqua  chap.,  177.
Smith,  Franklin  C,  Flour  Merchant.     Tamaqua,  238 ;  Tamaqua  chap.,  177.
SCHUYLKILL  HAVEN,  Schuylkill  County.
Hessar,  Henry,  Agent  Penna.  and  R.  Railroad  Oo.     Page,  270 ;  Reading
chap.,  152.
Huntzinger,  Lewis  L.,  Merchant.     Page,  270.
Saylor,  0.  L.„  M.D.,  Druggist.     Secretary,  Page,  270  ;  Schuylkill  chap.,  159.
SCEABTTOH-.
Bryant,  Jacob,  Builder.    J.  D.,  Peter  Williamson,  323  ;  Chap.,  185.
Burger,  Ferdinand,  Professor  of  Music  and  Proprietor  Concert  Saloon.
Union,  291 ;  Chap.,  185.
Dickson,  Geo.  L.,  General  Agent  Scranton  Foundery  and  Machine  Works.
Carbondale,  249 ;  Chap.,  179  ;  P.  E.  C,  Palestine  com.,  14.
Godfrey,  Joseph,  Proprietor  Forest  House.  P.  M.,  Hiram,  261 ;  Chap.,  179  ;
P.  C.  G.  and  Prelate,  Com.,  17.
Josephson,  Julius,  Clothier.     Union,  291.
Kingsbury,  Edward  P.,  Assistant  Treasurer  Lackawanna  Iron  and  Coal  Co.
W.  M.,  Union,  291 ;  H.  P.,  Chap.,  185  ;  Com.,  17.
Koch,  John  and  Louis,  Proprietors  Lackawanna  Restaurant.     Union,  291.
Lynde,  Edfrard  C,  Secretary  Lackawanna  Iron  and  Coal  Co.  S.  W.,  Peter
Williamson,  323 ;  Chap.,  185.
Meylert,  A.  N.,  Banker.     Peter  Williamson,  323 ;  Chap.,  185.
SELIIT'S  GROVE,  Snyder  County.
Eckbert,  William  F.,  Merchant.     W.  M.,  Lafayette,  194,
Eyer,  Henry  C.  Lafayette,  194 ;  Harrisburg  chap.
SHAMOKIM',  Northumberland  County.
Cherington,  W.  H.,  Merchant.     Shamokin,  255 ;  Schuylkill  chap.,  159.
Dewees,  John  H.,  Assistant  Superintendent  R.  R.  Shamokin,  255 ;  Northum-
berland chap.,  174.
Fagely,  Wm.,  Agent.     Shamokin,  255.
Fiske,  A.  R.,  Superintendent  S.  V.  and  Penna.  Railroad.  Shamokin,  255  ;
Northumberland  chap.,  174.
Kutzner,  Wm.,  Druggist.     Shamokin,  255.
Lake,  David,  Justice  of  the  Peace.     Shamokin,  255.
Beinhard,  Hiram,  Engineer.     Shamokin,  255.
Robins,  0.  M.,  M.D.  W.  M.,  Shamokin,  255  ;  P.  H.  P.,  Schuylkill  chap.,
159.
SHARON,  Mercer  County.
Irvine,  J.  M.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.  D.  D.  G.  M.  for  13th  Dist.,  composed
of  Beaver,  Lawrence,  and  Mercer  Counties.    Sharon,  250  ;'  Royal  Arch  Mason.
25

--- Sayfa 392 ---
380  world's  masonic  register.
shingle  house.
Mosher,  G.  W.,  Postmaster,  Physician  and  Surgeon,  Farmer,  and  Hotel-
keeper.    Macedonia,  258,  N.  T.
SNYDERVILLE.
Snyder,  George  J.,  Inn-keeper.    Lehigh,  32C.
SPRING  MILL.
Quinly,  Charles.    Boxborough,  135  ;  Columbia  Mark,  91.
Sheard,  Daniel,  Pilot.     Boxborough,  135 ;  Chap.,  3.
Sheard,  Luke,  Spring  Mill  Hotel.    Boxborough,  135  ;  Columbia  Mark,  91.
ST.  CLAIH,  Schuylkill  County.
Bowen,  Jonathan  P.,  Superintendent  Coal-braker.     Anthracite,  285.
Geiger,  John  L.,  Superintendent.     Treasurer,  Anthracite,  285.
Hess,  Constantine,  Carpenter.    Anthracite,  285.
Koch,  Charles,  Carpenter.     Anthracite,  285.
Koch,  Lewis  H.,  Merchant.    W.  M.,  Anthracite,  285.
Morrison,  John  M.,  Engineer.     Anthracite,  285.
Neiman,  Herman,  Merchant.    Anthracite,  285.
Pollock,  John,  Merchant  Tailor.     Anthracite,  285.
Slobig,  Daniel  K.,  Justice  of  the  Peace.     S.  W.,  Anthracite,  285.
SUMMIT  HILL,  Carbon  County.
Abbott,  M.  E.,  Founder  and  General  Machinist.     Bethlehem,  283 ;  Lilly
chap.,  181.
McMurtrie,  Josiah.     Carbon,  242  ;  Lilly  chap.,  181.
Miller,  Alexander,  Book-keeper.     Carbon,  242  ;  Lilly  chap.,  181.
Ohl,  J.  G.,  M.D.     Carbon,  242  ;  Lilly  chap.,  181.
.Vanhorn,  Nathan,  Coal  Merchant.     Tamaqua,  238  ;  Tamaqua  chap.,  177.
SUNBUBY,  Northumberland  County.
Pleasants,  Charles,  Attorney  at  Law.    "W.  M.,  Sunbury,  22.
SUSQUEHANNA  DEPOT.
Emery,  J.  W.  L.,  Clerk  N.  Y.  and  E.  Bailroad,  Wilkesbarre.   Wilkesbarre,  61.
TAMAQUA,  Schuylkill  County.
Allen,  W.  B.,  Draughtsman.     Tamaqua,  238.
Clayton,  Henry,  Superintendent  Bailroad.  Tamaqua,  238 ;  Tamaqua  chap.,
177.
Conrad,  J.  C.    J.  P.,  Pulaski,  216.
Conrad,  Philip,  Clerk.     Tamaqua,  238  ;  M.  of  3d  Veil,  Tamaqua  chap.,  177.
Deniston,  G.  W.,  Clerk.     Tamaqua,  238.
Ditchburn,  B.  F.,  Superintendent  of  Schools.  Tamaqua,  238  ;  Tamaqua
chap.,  177.
Enterline,  Edward,  Tanner.     Tamaqua,  238.

--- Sayfa 393 ---
PENNSYLVANIA.  381
Enterline,  Henry,  Plasterer.    Tamaqua,  238  ;  Tamaqua  chap.,  177.
Fellows,  A.  W.,  Contractor.  S.  W.,  Tamaqua,  238 ;  Scribe,  Tamaqua  chap.,
177 ;  St.  John's  com.,  4,  Phila.
Fouler,  M.  P.,  Commission  Merchant.    Tamaqua,  238  ;  Tamaqua  chap.,  177.
Hughn,  Henry,  Agent  Railroad.  P.  M.,  Tamaqua,  238 ;  P.  H.  P.,  Tamaqua
chap.,  177.
Kolb,  Rev.  Frederick.    W.  M.,  Tamaqua,  238  ;  K.,  Tamaqua  chap.,  177.
McCabe,  G.  H.,  Attorney  at  Law.  Tamaqua,  238  ;  Tamaqua  chap.,  177 ;
D.  D.  G.  M.,  Schuylkill  co.
Miller,  Charles  F.,  Merchant  Tailor.    Tamaqua,  238.
Rehrer,  Godfrey,  Civil  Engineer.     Tamaqua,  238  ;  Tamaqua  chap.,  177.
Reinhard,  D.  C,  Agent  Railroad.     Tamaqua,  238  ;  Reading  chap.,  152.
Ryan,  James,  Attorney  at  Law.     Tamaqua,  238.
Smith,  B.  B.,  Clerk.     Secretary,  Tamaqua,  238.
Weldy,  Francis,  Merchant.  Tamaqua,  238  ;  Tamaqua  chap.,  177  ;  Crusade
com.,  12.
Weldy,  H.  A.,  Pattern-maker.     Tamaqua,  238  ;  Tamaqua  chap.,  177.
TO  WANDA,  Bradford  County.
Benedict,  B.  S.,  Merchant  Tailor.  P.  J.  W.,  Union,  108 ;  C.  H.,  Union  chap.,
161 ;  Warden,  Northern  com.,  16.
Chamberlin,  Wm.  A.,  Jeweler  and  Watch  Repairer.  Treasurer,  Union,  108 ;
P.  Treasurer,  Union  chap.,  161.
Coolbaugh,  E.  B.,  Clerk  in  Commission  Office.  Union,  108  ;  Union  chap.,
161 ;  C.  G.,  Northern  com.,  16.
Culp,  Major  Jerry,  Saddle  and  Harness  Manufacturer.  P.  J.  W.,  Union,  108 ;
P.  Scribe,  Union  chap.,  161 ;  Northern  com.,  16.
Dreifuss,  Samuel,  Traveling  Merchant.     Danville,  224  ;  Union  chap.,  161.
Fox,  Geo.  E.,  Mercantile  Clerk.  P.  M.  and  Secretary,  Union,  108 ;  P.  H.  P.,
Union  chap.,  161 ;  E.  C,  Northern  com.,  16.
Goodrich,  E.  O.,  Proprietor  and  Publisher  of  Reporter.  P.  M.,  Union,  108  ;
H.  P.,  Union  chap.,  161 ;  Prelate,  Northern  com.,  16.
Gore,  W.  H.  H.,  Druggist  Clerk.  Union,  108 ;  Union  chap.,  161 ;  S.  B.,
Northern  com.,  16.
Hunt,  John  B.,  Clerk.  P.  S.  W.,  Union,  108 ;  Barnstable,  England ;  Royal
Arch  Mason.
Mason,  G.  F.,  Banker.  P.  M.,  Union,  108  ;  Union  chap.,  161 ;  Northern
com.,  16.
McKean,  Col.  Allen,  Clerk  of  Court.  Union,  108 ;  Union  chap.,  161 ;  Northern
com.,  16.
McKean,  H.  B.,  Attorney  at  Law.  W.  M.,  Union,  108  ;  King,  Union  chap.,
161;  S.  W.,  Northern  com.,  16.
Means,  Col.  John  T.,  Agriculturalist.     Union,  108  ;  Union  chap.,  161.
Montanye,  G.  D.,  Attorney  at  Law.  Union,  108 ;  Scribe,  Union  chap.,  161  ;
J.  W.,  Northern  com.,  16.
Smith,  C.  T.,  Capt.  Packet  Gazelle.    Union,  108.
Smith,  Tra  H.,  Mercantile  Salesman.  J.  W.,  Union,  108;  G.  M.  1st  Veil,
Union  chap.,  161.

--- Sayfa 394 ---
382  world's  masonic  register.
Webb,  J.  H.,  Parmer,  County  Register,  and  Recorder.    Treasurer,  Union,  108.
Treasurer,  Union  chap.,  161 ;  Treasurer,  Northern  com.,  16.
TBEMONT,  Schuylkill  County.
Althouse,  D.  B.,  Agent.    P.  M.,  Swatara,  267.
Barndt,  John  H.,  Merchant.    P.  M.,  Swatara,  267  ;  Schuylkill  chap.,  159.
Deibler,  John,  Merchant  Tailor.     T.,  Swatara,  267  ;  Schuylkill  chap.,  159.
Drake,  Gabriel,  Agent  M.  H.  Railroad.    W.  M.,  Swatara,  267.
Eckel,  Aaron,  Merchant.     P.  M.,  Swatara,  267.
Ensensperger,  Joseph,  Proprietor  Restaurant.     Swatara,  267.
Green,  John,  Machinist.     Swatara,  267  ;  Schuylkill  chap.,  159.
Mayberry,  "William,  Clerk.     Swatara,  267.
Miller,  John  T.,  Painter.     Swatara,  267.
Stine,  John,  Parmer.     Swatara,  267.
Tice,  J.  A.  L.,  Merchant.    P.  M.,  Swatara,  267  ;  Schuylkill  chap.,  159.
Wiest,  E.  P.,  Agent.    P.  M.,  Swatara,  267.
TKEVEETOW,  Northumberland  County.
Hagins,  John  M.,  Machinist.     Shamokin,  255.
Heiny,  A.  N.,  Justice  of  the  Peace.    Sunbury,  22.
Kline,  Reuben,  Tinsmith.     Shamokin,  255.
Kramer,  Jacob  G.,  Boss  Miner.    Shamokin,  255.
Mayer,  Elias,  Carpenter.     Shamokin,  255.
McWilliams,  John,  Blacksmith.     Shamokin,  255.
Shantz,  S.  D.,  Paymaster  Tamaqua  Coal  Co.     Milton  Lodge,  256.
Strawser,  John  R.,  Blacksmith.     Shamokin,  255.
Weaver,  L.  S.,  Machinist.     Shamokin,  255.
TJWCHLAM',  Chester  County.
Evans,  J.  Benner,  Parmer.     W.  M.,  Williamson,  309 ;  Columbia  Mark,  91.
DEDICATION  OF  LODGES.
The  dedication  of  Masonic  Lodges  wag  unknown  until  about  the  beginning  of
the  present  century.  A  great  change  was  made  in  the  work  about  that  time,
and  particularly  in  the  introduction  of  a  reference  to  St.  John,  or  the  Sts.  John,
in  the  ritual ;  and,  in  order  to  appear  to  be  consistent,  a  falsehood  was  fabricated,
by  asserting  that  in  ancient  times  Masonic  Lodges  were  dedicated  to  Solomon,  and
afterward  to  Zerubbabel.  The  most  positive  evidence  exists  that  Lodges  never
were  dedicated  at  all  until  about  seventy  years  ago,  and  certainly  not  to  either
Solomon  or  Zerubbabel.  The  introduction'  of  the  above  Action  necessitated  the
fabrication  of  others  found  in  most  Monitors  and  Charts,  particularly  all  that  is
said  about  St.  John  the  Evangelist  being  a  Freemason,  and  assuming  the
government  of  the  Craft  in  his  old  age.  The  authors  of  Manuals,  Charts,  and
pretended  rituals  of  Masonry  are  responsible  for  the  introduction  of  those  fic-
tions in  the  work,  and  therefore,  if  there  were  no  other  reasons,  these  publica-
tions ought  to  be  discarded  by  the  Craft.

--- Sayfa 395 ---
RHODE  ISLAND.
GRAND   LODGE.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  Rhode  Island  was  organized  June  27th,  5791.  Its
Annual  Communications  are  held  on  the  twenty- seventh  of  December,  at  such
place  as  is  appointed  from  time  to  time.  It  has  also  four  Quarterly  Communi-
cations, held  in  the  City  of  Providence  or  such  other  place  as  is  appointed,  on
the  last  Monday  in  August,  November,  February,  and  May.  The  Grand  Lodge
is  composed  of  the  Grand  Officers,  Past  Masters,  and  Masters  and  "Wardens  of
its  regularly  chartered  Lodges.
The  revenue  of  the  Grand  Lodge. is  derived  from  the  following  sources: —
For  Dispensations  for  new  Lodges
$75
For  every  Candidate  Initiated,  Passed,  and  Raised  .        .  4
There  are  16  subordinate  Lodges  in  this  jurisdiction,  as  per  last  report.  The
returns  show  1483  Members,  152  Initiations,  154  Passed,  137  Raised,  10  Admit-
ted, 20  Rejected,  9  Dimitted,  25  Deceased,  1  Expelled,  1  Suspended,  12  Entered
Apprentices,  22  Fellow  Crafts.  Whole  number  of  Masons,  1517 ;  Grand  Lodge
dues,  $548;  Receipts  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  $997  95.
The  following  named  brethren  are  the  officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  for  the
present  Masonic  year,  viz. : —
Wm.  Gray,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
Ariel  Ballou,  R.  "W.  Deputy  Grand  Master.
Philip  P.  Bourn,  R.  W.  Senior  Grand  "Warden.
Wm.  B.  Blonding,  R.  W.  Junior  Grand  Warden.
Gardner  T.  S warts,  "W.  Grand' Treasurer.
Thomas  A.  Doyle,  W.  Grand  Secretary.
Leonard  Wright,  W.  Senior  Grand  Deacon.
Ezra  S.  Dodge,  "W.  Junior  Grand  Deacon.
Israel  M.  Hopkins,  )   w  Grand  stewards.
Stanton  Hazard,       J
Rev.  Chas.  H.  Titos,  Grand  Chaplain.
Emerson  Goddard,  "W.  Grand  Marshal.
Benedict  Aldrich,  "W.  Grand  Sword  Bearer.
Benjamin  J.  Brown,  "W.  Grand  Pursuivant.
Charles  A.  Greene,  "W.  Grand  Lecturer.
Ebenezer  B.  White,  Grand  Tyler.
(383)

--- Sayfa 396 ---
3S4
world's  masonic  register.
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.
NO.       LODOE.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Masteb.
1  St.  John's,
2  St.  John's,
3  Washington,
4  Mount  Vernon,
6  St.  Alban's,
7  Friendship,
8  Mount  Moriah,
9  Harmony,
10  Union,
11  King  Solomon's,
12  Manchester,
13  Morning  Star,
15  Hamilton,
16  Warwick,
20  Franklin,
21  What  Cheer,
Newport.
Providence.
Warren.
Providence.
Bristol.
Gloucester.
Smithfield.
Pawtuxet.
Pawtucket.
East  Greenwich.
Coventry.
Woonsocket.
Clayville.
Phoenix.
Westerly.
Providence.
Monday  b.  f.  m.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Friday  b.  f.  m.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Friday  b.  f.  m.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Friday.
Asa  Hildreth.
Thos.  A.  Doyle.
Chas.  Mulchahey.
Jas.  Salsbury,  Jr.
Chas.  A.  Greene.
Israel  N.  Hopkins.
Stafford  Mowry.
Henry  Butler.
Nath.  Fairbrother.
Thos.  Fay.
Thos.  Siddell.
Ira  W.  Arnold.
Sheldon  P.  Lyon.
Jas.  J.  Smith.
Weeden  Clark.
Lyman  Elapp.
GRAND  CHAPTER.
The  Grand  Chapter  of  Rhode  Island  was  organized  in  March,  5798.  It  has
5  subordinate  Chapters  under  its  jurisdiction.  The  last  published  proceedings
show  a  total  of  300  Royal  Arch  Masons ;  Exaltations,  81 ;  Deaths,  17  ;  Sus-
pended, 1 ;  Dimitted,  1.
The  Annual  Convocations  of  the  Grand  Chapter  are  generally  held  in  the
City  of  Providence,  in  the  month  of  March.  This  Grand  Chapter  is  subordinate
to  the  General  Grand  Chapter.
SUBORDINATE  CHAPTERS.
ro.
Name.
Location.
1 Providenoe,
Providence.
2 Newport,
Newport.
3 Temple,
Warren.
4 Pawtucket,
Pawtucket.
5 Union,
Woonsocket.
Time  op  Meeting.
Thursday  after  full  moon.
Monday  before  full  moon.
GRAND  COUNCIL.
A  Grand  Council  of  Royal  and  Select  Masters,  for  the  State  of  Rhode  Island,
was  organized  at  Providence,  on  the  30th  of  October,  5860.  The  Councils
under  its  jurisdiction  are  three  in  number,  viz. : —

--- Sayfa 397 ---
RHODE   ISLAND.  385
Providence  Council,  No.  1,  Providence;  formerly  under  Maryland.
Pawtucket  Council,  No.  2,  Pawtucket ;  formerly  under  Massachusetts.
Webb  Council,  No.  3,  Warren ;  formerly  under  Connecticut.
Members,  estimated,  80.
The  following  are  the  officers  of  the  Grand  Council : —
111.  Comp.  James  Salsbury,  M.  P.  Grand  Master.
"      C.  H.  Titus,  D.  P.  Grand  Master.
"        "      Samuel  Lewis,  T.  111.  Grand  Master.
"      H.  P.  Smith,  G.  P.  C.  W.
Comp.  B.  P.  Clapp,  G.  T.
"      John  P.  Driscol,  G.  R.
"      Edwin  Howland,  G.  C.  G.
Sidney  Dean,  G.  0.
"      C.  M.  Nestell,  G.'  S.
"      B.  B.  White,  G.  G.
We  are  indebted  for  the  above  information  to  the  accomplished  Grand  Secre-
tary of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Ehode  Island,  E.  W.  Bro.  Thomas  A.  Doyle.
It  is  somewhat  singular  that  we  have  been  unable,  after  the  most  diligent
application,  to  obtain  any  information  in  regard  to  Councils  of  Royal  and
Select  Masters  in  Maryland,  and  believe  that  there  is  no  such  organization  in
that  State.  That  Providence  Council  was  formerly  under  Maryland,  we  think
is  an  error.    We  would  like  to  have  some  light  on  the  subject.
GENERAL   WOOSTER.
General  David  Woostek  was  born  at  Stratford,  Conn.,  in  the  year  1711,  and
graduated  at  Tale  College  in  1738.  Soon  after  leaving  College,  he  engaged  in
the  military  service  of  his  country,  and  was  a  captain  in  the  expedition  against
Louisburg  in  1745.  In  the  French  war,  he  served  as  colonel  of  a  regiment,  and
subsequently  as  brigadier-general,  which  office  he  held  at  the  close  of  that  war.
In  the  war  of  the  American  Revolution,  he  was  appointed  by  the  General  As-
sembly of  Connecticut  to  the  chief  command  of  the  troops  raised  for  the  defense
of  the  State.  In  1776,  he  was  appointed  major-general  in  the  Connecticut  ser-
vice, and  was  distinguished  for  his  skill  and  bravery  until  his  death,  which  hap-
pened the  2d  of  May,  1777,  having  been  mortally  wounded  by  a  musket-ball,
while  leading  his  men  to  an  attack  on  the  British  troops,  near  Danbury.  He
was  the  contemporary  of  Washington,  Franklin,  and  Lafayette.  He  was  made
a  Mason  in  early  life,  and  was  the  first  to  procure  a  charter  for  a  Masonic  Lodge
in  Connecticut.  Of  this  Lodge  he  was  the  first  Master,  elected  in  the  year
1750,  and  was  continued  in  the  same  honorable  station  until  his  zeal  for  his
country  induced  him  to  leave  the  peaceful  walks  of  civil  life  and  take  up  the
sword  in  the  cause  of  liberty,  which  sword  he  did  not  relinquish  until  called  to
yield  his  life  on  the  field  of  battle.

--- Sayfa 398 ---
386  world's  masonic  register.
ANTI-MASONIC   INCIDENT.
The  anti-Masonic  period  was  prolific  with  mountebanks  and  impostors,  who
went  traveling  up  and  down,  to  and  fro,  through  the  land,  lecturing  upon  the
subject  of  Freemasonry,  and  having  exhibitions,  in  which  they  pretended  to  go
through  with  the  Masonic  ceremonies  as  they  were  performed  in  a  Masonic
Lodge,  in  the  making  of  Masons.  These  exhibitions  were  often  the  scene  of
much  merriment,  as  those  who  were  Freemasons  generally  went  to  these  per-
formances, and  the  admission  fee  of  a  shilling  or  a  quarter  of  a  dollar  cheaply
purchased  the  great  amount  of  fun  they  enjoyed.  The  exhibitors  and  actors  in
these  novel  performances  were  rarely  those  who  had  ever  been  in  a  Masonic
Lodge ;  they  obtained  all  their  information  from  books,  of  which  a  great  num-
ber were  published  at  the  time,  and  these  they  took  for  granted  were  true  expo-
sures of  the  Masonic  secrets.
In  one  of  the  towns  in  the  western  part  of  the  State  of  New  York  one  of
these  exhibitors  made  his  appearance,  and  in  a  large  placard,  colored  and  illus-
trated, announced  that  he  intended  to  go  through  the  whole  of  the  ceremonies
of  the  three  first  degrees  of  Freemasonry,  and  invited  the  public — men,  women,
and  children,  Masons  and  non-Masons  —  to  attend.  Price  of  admission
twenty-five  cents.  On  the  first  night  of  the  exhibition  there  were  just  twenty
persons  present;  amount  of  receipts  five  dollars,  which  did  not  pay  the  expense
of  the  room  for  one  evening;  and  the  greater  portion  of  those  who  were  there
were  Freemasons.  The  next  night  the  exhibitor  thought  to  do  better,  as  he
stated  that  the  Freemasons  were  highly  pleased  with  his  performances.  The  truth
is,  the  Masons  took  particular  pains  to  go  to  those  who  were  so  violently  opposed
to  the  institution,  and  recommended  them  to  go  to  the  exhibition  if  they  had
any  curiosity  to  know  the  Masonic  secrets.
The  next  night  there  were  just  twelve  persons  there,  eleven  of  whom  were
Freemasons.  The  exhibitor  delayed  going  through  the  performance  till  a  late
hour,  and  then,  disheartened  and  discouraged,  he  proposed  postponing  the  exhi-
bition until  the  next  evening.  As  he  said  nothing  about  returning  the  money
which  each  had  paid  to  be  admitted,  those  inside  expressed  themselves  as  being
very  desirous  to  be  enlightened  upon  so  interesting  a  subject  before  they  left,
and  among  those  who  were  most  anxious  was  the  non-Mason;  he  could  not
think  of  leaving  without  being  in  possession  of  the  much-coveted  secret.  As
this  one  was  so  importunate  and  determined,  the  exhibitor  finally  told  him  that
he  would  commence,  but  it  was  necessary  that  one  of  the  party  should  act  as
the  candidate  to  be  initiated.  The  twelve  put  it  to  vote  among  themselves  who
should  be  the  candidate,  and  the  non-Mason  was  selected.  The  exhibitor  band-
aged his  eyes,  and  seated  him  on  a  chair.  At  this  point  the  eleven  left  the
room,  as  they  had  beforehand  agreed ;  and  the  exhibitor,  finding  he  had  no  audi-
tors, took  his  leave  also,  having  first  told  the  candidate  to  remain  seated  for  a
little  while.  As  all  was  quiet,  the  candidate  finally  ventured  to  speak,  but,  re-
ceiving no  reply,  he  removed  the  handkerchief  from  his  eyes  and  found  himself
alone.  He  never  could  be  convinced  but  that  it  was  a  plot  of  the  Freemasons
to  play  a  trick  upon  him  and  cheat  him  out  of  twenty-five  cents.

--- Sayfa 399 ---
SOUTH  CAROLINA.
GRAND    LODGE.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  South  Carolina  was  organized  February  5th,  5787.  Its
Annual  Communications  are  held  on  the  third  Tuesday  in  November,  at  such
place  as  the  Grand  Lodge  shall  from  time  to  time  determine.  In  consequence
of  the  Grand  Lodge  being  engaged  in  revising  its  constitution,  we  are  unable
to  state  what  are  its  sources  of  revenue  or  what  composes  the  membership  of
the  Grand  Lodge.  By  a  recent  amendment  each  Lodge  is  "entitled  to  three
votes,  and  may  be  represented  by  the  Master  and  Wardens,  or  any  one  or  two
of  them,  or  by  a  delegate  or  delegates  appointed  by  the  Lodge  or  the  Master."
There  are  92  subordinate  Lodges  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Grand  Lodge.
We  collect  the  following  statistics  from  the  returns  of  69  Lodges,  published  in
the  proceedings  of  November,  5859.  Number  of  members,  3337 ;  F.  C,  109  ;
E.  A.,  99  ;  Dimissions,  235  ;  Deaths,  52  ;  Affiliations,  56.  Amount  of  receipts
from  Lodges,  $2149  50  ;  for  Charters,  $330 ;  from  arrears  of  members,  $96  75  ;
making  a  total  of  $2576  25.
The  officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  for  the  present  Masonic  year,  elected  Novem-
ber 20th,  5860,  are  as  follows  :—
B.  Rush  Campbell,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
David  Ramsay,  R.  W.  Deputy  Grand  Master.
T.  P.  Slider,  R.  W.  Senior  Grand  Warden.
J.  D.  Barnett,  R.  W.  Junior  Grand  Warden.
R.  0.  Williams,  R.  W.  Grand  Chaplain.
J.  H.  Honour,  R.  W.  Grand  Treasurer.
A.  G.  Mackey,  M.D.,  R.  W.  Grand  Secretary.
J.  T  Robertson,  1  w  genior  Gran(J  Deacons_
li.  Anderson,       J
S.  G  Mobley,  M.D.,  1  w  Junior  Gpand  Deacons_
U.  W .  Hawthorne,    >
P.  K.  Coburn,  R.  Grand  Marshal.
Thomas  H.  Pitts,  W.  Grand  Pursuivant.
George  Seaborn,  |
w  Gran(J  stewardg
J.  H.  Nash,  i
Samuel  Burk,  Grand  Tyler.
A.  G.  Mackey,  R.  W.  Grand  Lecturer.
(387)

--- Sayfa 400 ---
388
world's  masonic  register.
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.
No.       Lodge.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
1  Solomon's,
3  Clinton,
4  UnionKilwinning
5  Washington,
9  Friendship,
10  St.  Andrew's,
11  Winnsboro,'
14  Orange,
15  Cheraw,
17  Harmony,
18  Chester,
19  Palmetto,
21  Pythagorean,
22  Harmony,
23  Independent,
24  Williamston,
25  Friendship,
26  Benton,
27  Buford,
28  Orangeburg,
29  Kershaw,
30  Ridgeway,
31  Recovery,
32  Johnston,
33  Aurora,
34  Pendleton,
35  Fraternity,
36  La  Candeur,
37  Centre,
38  Allen,
39  Richland,
40  Winyah,
41  St.  John's,
42  Tyrian,
43  Eureka,
44  Campbell,
45  Effingham,
46  Kingstree,
47  Eureka,
48  Lebanon,
49  Wallace,
50  Concordia,
52  Mackey,
53  Jackson,
54  St.  Peter's,
55  Unity,
Charleston.
Abbeville  C.  H.
Charleston.
Charleston.
Charleston.
Charleston.
Winnsboro'.
Charleston.
Cheraw.
Barnwell  C.  H.
Chester  C.  H.
Laurensville.
Charleston.
Beaufort.
Due  West.
Williamston.
Kirsey's  i^  Roads.
Timmonsville.
Buford's  Bridge.
Orangeburg  C.  H.
Camden.
Ridgeway.
Greenville.
Goshen  Hill.
Clio.
Pendleton.
Adams  Run.
Charleston.
Honea  Path.
Bamberg.
Columbia.
Georgetown.
Bluffton.
Erwinton.
Adamsville.
Clinton.
Effingham.
Kingstree.
Ninety-Six.
Myersville.
Laurens  District.
Edgefield  C.  H.
Hickory  Grove.
Lancaster  C.  H.
Manning.
Walterboro'.
1st  Monday.
2d  Monday.
3d  Thursday.
2d  Thursday.
4th  Monday.
3d  Monday.
Thursday  bef.  f.  m.
2d  Monday.
2d  Monday.
4th  Thursday.
Saturday  bef.  f.  m.
1st  Thursday.
2d  Thursday.
1st  Wednesday.
Thursday  after  f.  m.
Wednesday  aft.  f.  m.
On  or  near  f.  m.
1st  Friday.
2d  Saturday.
3d  Wednesday.
1st  Monday.
Thursday  bef.  f.  m.
Saturday  after  f.  m.
Night  of  full  moon.
1st  Fri.  aft.  2d  Th.
2d  Tuesday.
4th  Saturday.
1st  Tuesday.
2d  Wednesday.
Saturday  of  f.  m.
Friday  of  f.  m.
John  Corby.
W.  H.  Parker.
Francis  D.  Lee.
W.  P.  Russell.
H.  H.  De  Leon.
Philip  Austin.
Hugh  Miller.
Robert  S.  Bruns.
Ben.  F.  Pegues.
Jas.  0.  Hagood.
John  R.  Allen.
Irby  Dunklin.
W.  T.  Miller.
Jas.  A.  Nash.
Jas.  T.  Sitton.
J.  D.  Barnett.
G.  W.  Carwile.
J.  W.  Owens.
Leroy  Wilson.
V.  D.  V.  Jamison.
J.  B.  Kershaw.
John  Boyd,  M.D.
T.  S.  Arthur.
R.  S.  Chick.
A.  L.  McCormac.
W.  R.  Jones.
E.  D.  La  Rocke.
.  J.  J.  McBath.
E.  T.  Edgerton.
.  John  A.  Kay.
R.  E.  Fraser.
Wm.  H.  Anderson.
J.  J.  Herndon.
Elias  Bearden.
1st  Friday.  Samuel  W.  Maurice.
Thursday  after  f.  m.  J.  W.  Calhoun.
  T.  R.  Bass.
Sat.  bef.  2d  Sunday.  Wm.  Power.
3d  Saturday.  T.  J.  Teague.
Thursday  of  f.  m.      J.  D.  Wylie.
2d  Saturday.  F.  W.  Fraser.

--- Sayfa 401 ---
SOUTH  CAROLINA.
389
No.
Location.
Tims  op  Meetino.
Master.
56  Catawba,
•57  Mt.  Willing,
58  Mt.  Moriah,
59  Butler,
60  Clinton,
61  Harmony,
62  Charity,
63  Blaokville,
64  Claremont,
65  Horry,
66  Walhalla,
67  Harmony,
68  Hiram,
69  Oman,
70  Spartan,
71  Egeria,
72  St.  David's,
73  StrictObservance,  Charleston.
74  Washington,       Indian  Hill.
75  Union,
76  Landmark,
77  Mackey,
78  Philanthropic,
79  Keowee,
Fort  Mills.
Mt.  Willing.
White  Plains.
Coleman's  t*!  Roads.
Marion  C.  H.
George's  Station.
White  Cane.
Blaokville.
Sumterville.
Conwayboro'.
Charleston.
Hamburg.
Anderson's  C.  H.
Cedar  Falls.
Spartanburg  C.  H.
Jedburg.
Darlington  C.  H.
80  Bascom,
81  Calhoun,
82  Caldwell,
83  Little  Pedee,
Unionville.
Charleston.
Harlee9ville.
Yorkville.
Pickens  C.  H.
Cokesbury.
Glenn  Springs.
Longmire's  Store.
Allen's  Bridge.
84  True  Brotherhood  Columbia.
85  Flint  Hill,
86  Roslin,
87  Amity,
88  Marlboro',
89  Bascomville,
90  Caldwell,
91  Greenwood,
92  Blue  Ridge,
93  St.  Andrew's,
94  Acacia,
95  Etiwan,
96  Franklin,
97  Coleman,
98  American,
99  Star,
100  Monticello,
101  Marietta,
Flint  Hill.
Lowndesville.
Newbury  C.  H.
Bennettsville.
Bascomville.
Calhoun's  Mills.
Greenwood.
Walhalla.
St.  Jago,  Cuba.
Columbia.
Mt.  Pleasant.
Charleston.
Feasterville.
Gillesonville.
Graniteville.
Monticello.
Ebenezer.
2d  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
1st  Friday.
Thursday  of  f.  m.
1st  Monday.
4th  Tuesday.
1st  Friday.
1st  Monday.
1st  Friday.
1st  Monday.
3d  Saturday.
1st  Friday.
2d  Saturday.
Friday  before  f.  m.
1st  Wednesday.
3d  Monday.
1st  Monday.
4th  Friday.
Friday  after  f.  m.
Saturday  after  f.  m.
3d  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Monday.
Friday  of  f.  m.
1st  Friday.
3d  Friday.
3d  Monday.
2d  Saturday.
.  Thos.  C.  Chapman.
John  May.
L.  Dantzler.
C.  J.  Mason.
T.  F.  Gillespie.
J.  H.  Jungbluth.
J.  B.  Clark.
Jas.  McCullough.
J.  M.  Elford.
J.  R.  Thornley.
Silvester  H.  King.
J.  L.  Sibert.
B.  T.  Arthur.
Jas.  Conner.
J.  Ed.  Jefferys.
R.  A.  Thompson.
J.  K.  Vance.
Wm.  Webster.
B.  Henry  Howard.
Stephen  Smith.
A.  F.  Lumpkin.
John  C.  Speer.
Jas.  M.  Bartu.
John  J.  Herndon.
W.  T.  D.  Cousar.
M.  O.  Talman.
Wm.  P.  Hill.

--- Sayfa 402 ---
390
world's  masonic  register.
GRAND    CHAPTER.
Organized  Mat  29,  5812.
This  Grand  Chapter  is  subordinate  to  the  General  Grand  Chapter.  The
Grand  High  Priest  of  this  Grand  Chapter,  M.  E.  Comp.  Albert  G.  Mackey,  is
the  present  M.  E.  G.  G.  H.  P.  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter.  The  Grand
Chapter  of  South  Carolina  holds  its  Annual  Convocations  in  the  City  of
Charleston,  on  the  second  Tuesday  in  February.  It  has  19  subordinate  Chap-
ters under  its  jurisdiction,  having  a,  total  membership,  February,  5860,  of  534.
Exalted  during  the  year,  134  ;  Died,  7  ;  Dimitted,  4 ;  Suspended,  1 ;  Amount  of
dues,  fees,  etc.,  $863  96.
SUBORDINATE   CHAPTERS.
No.       Name.
1  Carolina,
2  Flint  Hill,
3  Union,
5  Columbia,
6  Rising  Sun,
7  Burning  Bush,
8  Bezaleel,
9  Orient,
11  Zerubbabel,
12  Germania,
13  Eureka,
15  Mackey,
17  Hesperian,
18  Signet,
19  Keystone,
20  Delta,
21  Living  Arch,
22  Cyrus,
23  Excelsior,
Location.
Charleston.
Flint  Hill.
Charleston.
Columbia.
Laurensville.
Anderson  C.  H.
Edgefield  C.  H.
Cokesbury.
Charleston.
Charleston.
Orangeburg  C.  H.
Torkville.
Abbeville  C.  H.
Newberry  C.  H.
Lancaster  C.  H.
Buford's  Bridge.
Pendleton.
Greenville.
Cheraw.
Time  op  Meeting.
Second  Tuesday.
Third  Tuesday.
Second  Wednesday.
Saturday  after  full  moon.
Second  Monday.
First  Monday.
Third  Friday.
Third  Friday.
Fourth  Thursday.
First  Saturday.
First  Monday.
Last  Friday.
Second  Monday.
First  Tuesday.
Third  Wednesday.
Evening  before  full  moon.
Third  Monday.
Thursday  of  or  b.  f.  m.
GRAND  COUNCIL.
A  Grand  Council  of  Royal  and  Select  Masters,  for  the  State  of  South  Caro-
lina, was  organized  February  16th,  5860.  The  following  Councils  were  repre-
sented :  No.  1  at  Charleston,  No.  2  at  Laurens,  No.  3  at  Cokesbury,  No.  4  at
Anderson,  No.  5  at  York,  No.  6  at  Lancaster,  No.  7  at  Flint  Hill,  No.  8  at
Columbia,  and  No.  9  at  Cheraw.
COMMANDERT.
There  is  but  one  Commandery  in  South  Carolina,  which  is  located  at  Charles-
ton. It  was  chartered  September  23d,  1823.  At  the  Triennial  meeting  of  the
Grand  Encampment  of  the  United  States,  in  1859,  it  returned  23  members.

--- Sayfa 403 ---
SOUTH   CAROLINA.  391
SUBSCRIBERS'  NAMES.
CHABLESTOST.
Aimar,  Michael  Louis,  Captain  Marine  School-ship  Lodebar.    Solomon's,  1.
Armstrong,  Archibald.    P.  M.,  Strict  Observance,  73.
Barkley,  Charles,  Captain.     Lodge ;  Carolina  chap.,  1.
Bird,  Wm.  M.,  Salesman,  Holms  &  Co.     Secretary,  Solomon's,  1.
Burk,  Wm.  J.,  Pilot  of  Charleston  Bar,  residence,  7  Church  St.  Solomon's,
1 ;  CM.  3d  Veil,  Union  chap.,  3  ;  Captain  of  G.  and  Select  M.,  Adoniram
coun.,  7.
Corby,  J.  W.,  Shipsmith.     W.  M.,  Solomon's,  1.
Davenport,  E.  L.,  Branch  Pilot,  "Weim  Court.     Solomon's,  1.
Davis,  George  W.,  Branch  Pilot  for  Charleston  Bar  and  Harbor,  5  Tradd  St.
Solomon's,  1.
Dexter,  S.  Fr.,  Captain,  34  Church  St.  Solomon's,  1 ;  Capt.,  Carolina  chap.,  1 ;
R.  A.M.
Dunning,  David,  Captain,  59  East  Bay.     Solomon's,  1.
Edwart,  Ed.,  Captain  Ship  Chase.    Friendship,  9.
Jones,  Thomas,  Branch  Pilot,  63  East  Bay.     Solomon's,  1;  Union  chap.,  3.
Kroeg,  Andrew,  Captain,  6  Cannon  St.     Solomon's,  1 ;  Carolina  chap.,  1.
Mackey,  Albert  G.  33.-.  G.  G.  H.  P.  of  the  U.  S. ;  G.  H.  P.  of  Grand  Chap,
of  South  Carolina ;  Thrice  111.  G.  M.  of  Grand  Coun.  of  R.  and  S.  M.  of  South
Carolina ;  G.  Secretary  of  Gen.  H.  E.  in  Southern  Jurisdiction  of  U.  S.  Ancient
and  Accepted  Rite ;  P.  G.  G.  Warden,  Grand  Encpt.,  U.  S.,  and  G.  Secretary
of  South  Carolina  Grand  Lodge.
Melchers,  P.,  Proprietor  and  Publisher  of  Deutsche  Zeitung.  P.  M.,  Wal-
halla,  66 ;  P.  H.  P.,  Germania  chap.,  12  ;  South  Carolina  com.,  .1.
Miller,  Zadock,  Ship  Chandler,  125  East  Bay.     Pythagorean,  21.
Nolan,  Captain  Andrew.     St  Andrew's,  10 ;  Carolina  chap.,  1.
Nonel,  Andrew,  13  Market  St.  St.  Andrew,  10  ;  Carolina  chap.,  1 ;  Adoniram
coun.,  1 ;  Royal  and  Select  Master.
Pinkursohn,  Pinkus,  Clothing  Store,  East  Bay.    La  Candeur,  36.
Ramesden,  John,  Captain,  cor.  Church  and  Longetud  Lane.     Solomon's,  1.
Robert,  Fr.,  Captain,  cor.  Church  and  Atlantek  St.  Pythagorean,  21 ;  Masonic
Benevolent  Society.
Symons,  John,  Rigger  and  Stevedore,  6  Gingnard  St.  Pythagorean,  21;  R.  A.
Capt.,  Union  chap.,  3.
Thayer,  Ebenezer.     P.  M.,  Solomon's,  1 ;  P.  H.  P.,  Union  chap.,  3.
Walker,  Henry.    Solomon's,  1.
Wood,  George  P.  P.  M.,  Pythagorean,  21 ;  Carolina  chap.,  1 ;  Carolina
com.,  1.
COLUMBIA.
Hewetson,  Ralph  E.  B.,  Civil  Engineer.  Secretary,  Richland,  39  ;  Columbia
chap.,  5  ;  Union  coun.,  5.
Kay,  John  A.,  Architect  and  Civil  Engineer,  Assistant  Architect  of  New
State  Capitol,  Columbia.     P.  M.,  Richland.  39.
Renno,  John  A.,  Book-keeper.     Secretary,  Richland,  39;  G.  J.  W.,  Enoch

--- Sayfa 404 ---
392  world's  masonic  register.
Lodge  of  Perfection,  2,  A.-.  A.-.  R.\;  Orator,  De  Molay  conn.,  R.  R.— H.  of  30th
degree,  A.-.  A.-.  B.\;  32.\
COLUMBUS.
Lilienthal,  Moses,  Merchant.     RichlaDd,  39  ;  Royal  Arch  Mason.
DUB  WEST  CORNER.
Hawthorn,  D.  W.,  Merchant.     P.  M.,  Independent,  23.
Sitton,  I.  S.,  Coach-maker.    Independent,  23.
FAIRFIELD  DISTRICT.
McCully,  John,  Sen.,  Farmer.    Flint  Hill,  85 ;  Flint  Hill  chap.,  2.
THE  BOOK  OF  THE  LAW.
There  are  no  people  in  the  world  who  have  a  higher  regard,  or  veneration
we  may  say,  for  the  Holy  Bible  than  Freemasons.  It  is  by  us  termed  the  "  first
great  light,"  and  rightly  so,  because  it  contains  those  precepts  and  moral  lessons
which  teach  us  our  duties  toward  God,  our  neighbors,  and  ourselves.  It  em-
braces in  its  teachings  the  entire  code  of  morality,  and  as  Masonry  is  a  moral
institution,  it  adopts  its  teachings  as  its  own.  No  man  who  does  not  live  a
moral  life,  or  whose  principles  and  practices  are  not  in  conformity  with  the  laws
of  morality,  caD,  with  propriety,  be  admitted  into  our  Order.  A  candidate  for
the  honors  of  Freemasonry  must,  or  should  be,  a  moral  man.  This  is  a  qualifi-
cation which  Freemasonry  requires  ;  not  a  simple  belief  in  the  moral  code,  but
the  actual  evidence  in  the  blameless  and  virtuous  life  of  those  who  aspire  to  its
mysteries.  There  are  those,  as  daily  experience  teaches  us.  who  make  loud
boastings  of  their  belief  in  the  Sacred  Volume,  whose  lips  utter  blasphemy,
who  defraud  the  widow  and  the  fatherless,  who  are  inebriates,  who  violate  the
sanctity  of  the  family  hearth,  who  commit  every  crime  against  God  and  Man.
Would  to  God  that  our  time-honored  Order  had  always  been  free  from  the
polluting  contamination  of  the  evil-doers.  It  is  not  an  avowed  belief  in  the
Great  I  Am,  the  kind  and  good  Father,  whose  mercies  extend  over  all  his
works,  and  who  holds  in  his  hands  the  destinies  of  all  men,  that  restrains  the
wicked  in  his  wickedness,  as  Freemasonry  has  sad  cause  to  know ;  and  if  the
thought  of  that  Superintending  Power,  before  whom  we  tremble  as  we  write,  and
the  stoutest  quail,  is  not  sufficient  to  cause  those  who  profess  to  believe  in  His
holy  name  to  do  right,  can  it  be  supposed  that  subscribing  to  a  belief  in  His
holy  Law  will  be  more  potent  and  effective  in  causing  the  weak  and  the  bad  to
fear  and  love  him  ?  Freemasonry  requires  a  belief  in  the  existence  of  a  Supreme
Being,  for  the  reason  that  he  who  assumes  its  obligations  has  at  least  the  fear
of  God  to  prevent  him  from  violating  his  sacred  pledges.  This  belief  all  must
avow  who  partake  of  our  mysteries.  So  far  an  avowel  of  belief  is  necessary,
and  no  farther.  As  to  the  morality  of  the  Order,  or  the  moral  precepts  con-
tained in  the  Sacred  Volume,  as  these  are  the  highest  standard  of  moral  duty
and  obligation,  Freemasonry'  demands  that  those  who  would  be  united  with  us
in  the  bonds  of  brotherhood  must  be  good  men,  moral  men,  who  have  lived  in
conformity  to  the  precepts  and  teachings  of  the  Book  of  the  Law.

--- Sayfa 405 ---
TENNESSEE.
GRAND  LODGE.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  Tennessee  was  organized  October  14th,  5813.  Its
Grand  Annual  Communication  is  held  in  the  City  of  Nashville,  commencing  on
the  first  Monday  in  October.  The  Grand  Lodge  consists  of  the  Grand  Officers,
Past  Grand  Masters,  Past  Deputy  Grand  Masters,  Past  Grand  Wardens,  Past
Masters,  and  the  Masters  and  Wardens  of  Lodges.  The  revenue  of  the  Grand
Lodge  is  derived  from  the  following  sources  : — •
For  a  Dispensation  for  a  new  Lodge        .        .        .  $5  00
For  a  Charter
20  00
For  each  Degree  conferred
1  00
For  each  Member    25
There  are  218  subordinate  Lodges  in  this  jurisdiction.  Degrees  conferred  for
the  year  ending  September  1st,  5860  :  Entered  Apprentices,  1195 ;  Fellow  Crafts,
1085 ;  Masters,  1043 ;  Number  of  Master  Masons,  September  1st,  5860,  of  Lodges
making  returns,  9666  ;  Estimate  of  Lodges  which  made  no  returns,  500  ;  Total
number  of  members  reported,  11,102.  Amount  of  dues  paid  to  the  Grand
Lodge,  October  1st,  5860,  $4902  35.
Officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Tennessee,  elected  October  2d,  5860  : —
James  McOallum,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
John  F.  Slovee,  B.  W.  Deputy  Grand  Master.
John  H.  Devebeux,  E.  W.  Senior  Grand  Warden.
Timothy  B.  McDowell,  E.  W.  Junior  Grand  Warden.
Williamson  H.  Horn,  E.  W.  Grand  Treasurer.
Charles  A.  Fuller,  E.  W.  Grand  Secretary.
Rev.  Samuel  D.  Baldwin,  E.  W.  Grand  Orator.
Rev.  Wiley  M.  Eeed,  E.  W.  Grand  Chaplain.
William  H.  Fitch,  Senior  Grand  Deacon.
L.  H.  Eooan,  Junior  Grand  Deacon.
John  T.  Edgar,  Jr.,  Grand  Sword  Bearer.
George  W.  Parrott,  Grand  Marshal.
Lewis  A.  Garrett,  Grand  Pursuivant.
John  McClelland,  Grand  Steward.
Michael  E.  DeGrove,  Grand  Tyler.
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.
No.    Lodge.  Location.
5  Overton,  Rogersville.
7  Hiram,  Franklin.
8  Cumberland,  Nashville.
Time  op  Meeting.
1st  Monday.
4th  Monday.
3d  Saturday.
Master.
John  Hasson.
Stephen  West.
Sumner  Kirkpatrick
(393)

--- Sayfa 406 ---
394
world's  masonic  register.
No.         Lome.
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
Master.
9  Western  Star,
Springfield.
3d  Monday.
B.  H.  Anderson.
13  Whitesides,
Blountville.
1st  Monday.
Joseph  E.  Dulaney.
14  Carthage  Benevolent,  Carthage.
1st  Monday.
L.  H.  Cardwell.
18  Mount  Moriah
,   Murfreesboro'.
1st  Monday.
Horace  P.  Keeble.
24  Elkton,
Elkton.
1st  Friday.
Samuel  H.  Stout.
31  Columbia,
Columbia.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m .  James  M.  Harwell.
38  Union,
Kingston.
Sat.  b.  1st  Mon.
N.  A.  Patterson.
44  KisiDg  Star,
Ru  Hedge.
4th  Thursday.
Benjamin  Peck.
45  Jackson,
Jackson.
4th  Friday.
John  Chester.
47  Rhea,
Jonesboro'.
Every  Monday.
A.  G.  Mason.
50  Meridian  Sun,
Athens.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays, William  G.  Horton.
53  Olive  Branch,
Jasper.
54  Clinton,
Bolivar.
1st  Monday.
T.  B.  McDowell.
57  Mount  Pleasant,  Mount  Pleasant.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
William  Doss.
58  Brownsville,
Brownsville.
2d  Friday.
Benj.  F.  Coleman.
59  Mount  Libanus,  Knoxville.
2d  Monday.
Lilburn  H.  Rogan.
64  Constantine,
Lexington.
1st  Monday.
William  H.  Warren.
67  Blair,
Kingsport.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
68  Jackson,
Fayetteville.
1st  Monday.
H.  C.  Wright.
73  Somerville,
Somerville.
2d  Friday.
77  Liberty,
Smithville.
Sat.  after  1st  Fri.
Theodore  Staley.
80  Tellico,
Madisonville.
1st  Monday.
S.  M.  Richards.
81  Lagrange,
Lagrange.
2d  Monday.
Thomas  B.  Firth.
86  Trenton,
Trenton.
1st  Monday.
S.  W.  Caldwell.
88  Western  Sun,
Troy.
1st  Monday.
Solomon  W.  Cochran.
89  Clarksville,
Clarksville.
1st  Monday.
John  C.  Read.
90  Dresden,
Dresden.
1st  Monday.
A.  D.  Cutler.
93  Hess,
Dyersburg.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
W.  J.  Mahan.
94  King  Solomon,
Gallatin.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
James  W.  Guthrie.
95  Germantown,
Germantown.
Last  Thursday.
John  Grey.
96  Caledonia,
Caledonia.
1st  Wednesday.
Thomas  Smith.
97  Charlotte,
Charlotte.
1st  Saturday.
Jerome  B.  Cording.
98  Lebanon,
Lebanon.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
W.  H.  Orr.
99  Sparta,
Sparta.
1st  Monday.
Mont.  C.  Dibrell.
100  Ripley,
Durhamville.
4th  Friday.
J.  W.  Walker.
101  Pulaski,
Pulaski.
1st  Monday.
F.  C.  Barber.
102  Savannah,
Savannah.
1st  Monday.
J.  McDougal.
104  Union,
Mason's  Depot.
4th  Saturday.
I.  R.  Sherrod.
105  St.  James,
Williamsport.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m. Jesse  S.  McClain.
106  Huntingdon,
Huntingdon.
1st  Monday.
B.  J.  Brevard.
107  Lawrenceburg, Lawrenceburg.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
C.  B.  Davis.
108  Paris,
Paris.
1st  Monday.
C.  D.  Venable.
109  Marshall,
Barn  Hill.
3d  Saturday.
J.  J.  Blake.
111  Benton,
Santa  Fe.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m. John  T.  Sparkman.
112  Dillahunty,
Lewisburg.
1st  Monday.
R.  H.  Powell.
113  Union,
Hartsville.
1st  Tuesday.
Thomas  Stalker.
114  Harrison,
Harrison.
1st  Monday.
R.  G.  Jones.
115  Torkville,
Yorkville.
1st  Saturday.
William  H.  Hinson.
116  Tannehill,
Clarksville.
3d  Monday.
W.  J.  McCorinac.

--- Sayfa 407 ---
TENNESSEE.
395
No.
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
117  McLemoresville,  MoLemoreaville.
118  South  Memphis,  Memphis.
119  Greenville,  Greenville.
120  Macon,  Macon.
121  Boydsville,  Boydsville.
122  Shel'ile  Benev't,  Shelby ville.
123  Petersburg,         Petersburg.
124  Spring  Hill,        Spring  Hill.
125  Warren,  McMinnville.
126  Cornersville,       Cornersville.
127  Waynesboro',     Waynesboro'.
128  New  Providence,Mary ville.
129  Mars  Hill,  Middleton.
130  Sandy  Hill,
131  Phoenix,
Manleysville.
Nashville.
Purdy.
Gainesboro'.
Cleveland.
Triune.
Oakland.
Port  Eoyal.
Pleasant  Grove.
132  Purdy,
133  Tannehill,
134  Cleveland,
135  Triune,
136  Oakland,
137  Hampton,
138  Pleasant  Grove.
139  Vale  of  Tempe,  Pikeville.
140  Union,  Mifflin.
,141  Martin,  Rome.
144  Morning  Sun,  Morning  Sun.
145  Conyersville,  Conyersville.
146  Holly  Springs,  Macedonia.
147  AndrewJackson  Beulah.
148  Whiteville,  Whiteville.
149  Lafayette,  Lafayette.
150  Dunham,  Covington.
151  Hatchie,  Middleburg.
152  Colliersville,  Colliersville.
153  Cotton  Grove,  Cotton  Grove.
154  Denmark,  Denmark.
157  Acacia,  New  Providence.
158  Cumberland,  Winchester.
159  Washington,  Poland  Springs.
160  Chapel  Hill,  Chapel  Hill.
161  Boon's  Hill,  Boon's  Hill.
163  Mason's  Grove,  Mason's  Grove.
164  Quincey,
165  Danceyville,
166  Medon,
167  Bigby ville,
168  Angerona,
169  Dukedom,
170  Berlin,
Quincey.
Danceyville.
Medon.
Bigbyville.
Memphis.
Dukedom.
Saulsbury.
Friday  b.  f.  m.
2d  Friday.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
3d  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Monday.
Monday  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  after  1st  Mon.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thursday  b.  f  m.
2d  Monday.
Friday  b.  f.  m.
2d  Wednesday.
4th  Saturday.
3d  Monday.
3d  Friday.
1st  &  3d  Monday.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Wednesday.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
3d  Friday.
1st  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
3d  Wednesday.
3d  Monday.
1st  Thursday.
1st  Thursday.
3d  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Wednesday.
1st  Friday.
1st  Wednesday.
2d  Saturday.
3d  Monday.
3d  Saturday.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Friday  after  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
3d  Thursday.
2d  Thursday.
3d  Friday.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Monday.
Jst  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
26
John  Simoos.
James  P.  Bourne.
William  Boyce.
J.  S.  Baird.
Levi  Killebrew.
John  T.  Edgar.
W.  R.  Smith.
James  N.  McDonald.
D.  M.  Donnell.
S.  K.  Orr.
John  Stamps.
W.  A.  Marshall.
Noah  Rushing.
Morton  B.  Howell.
B.  R.  Harris.
L.  J.  Lowe.
David  Kinoannon.
James  M.  Peeble.
James  A.  Thompson.
R.  H.  Izor.
Andrew  J.  Campbell.
O  F.  Hendrick.
James  B.  Hale.
M.  L.  Williams.
John  Sanders.
N.  R.  Yarbrough.
B.  S.  Connelly.
William  M.  Norment.
U.  J.  Young.
J.  J.  Malone.
W.  B.  Morrow.
Elisha  Oneal.
Thomas  D.  Tarver.
W.  T.  Hargrave.
John  Burrough.
W.  B.  Johnson.
E.  T.  Williams.
A.  S.  Templeton.
W.  W.  Boykin.
B.  G.  H.  B.  Avery.
G.  W.  Parrott.
W.  D.  Winchester.
S.  J.  Crawford.
William  H.  Fitch,  Jr.
J.  R.  Eskridge.
Samuel  Lambert.

--- Sayfa 408 ---
396
world's  masonic  register.
Location.
Time  op  Meetiwg.
Master.
172  Owen  Hill,
173  Clifton,
174  Lavinia,
175  Alexandria,
176  Limestone,
177  Mt.  Pelia,
178  Como,
179  Camden,
180  Evening  Star,
181  Washington,
182  Nolensville,
183  Polk,
184  Harmony,
185  Lynnville,
186  Morning  Star,
188  Hiwassee,
189  McCullough,
190  Brazelton,
191  Shady  Grove,
192  Merriwether,
193  Spring  Creek,
194  Bethel,
195  Roche,
197  Mountain  Star,
198  Moscow,
199  Chattanooga,
200  Pearl,
201  Bethesda,
202  Shiloh,
203  Milton,
204  Tennessee,
206  Eaton,
207  Lineport,
208  Pleasant  Grove,
209  Baker,
210  Linden,
211  Woodlawn,
212  Ocoee,
213  Meigs,
214  Harmony,
215  Sulphur  Well,
216  Green  Mount,
217  Vernon,
218  Decaturville,
220  Hamburg,
221  Smyrna,
222  Montezuma,
223  St.  James,
224  Lanefield,
Jordan's  Store.
Clifton.
South  Carroll.
Alexandria.
Georgetown.
Mt,  Pelia.
Como.
Camden.
Tazewell.
Louisville.
Nolensville.
Centreville.
Silver  Top.
Lynnville.
Sulphur  Well.
Calhoun.
Palmyra.
Dandridge.
Shady  Grove.
Hampshire.
Spring  Creek.
Prospect.
Columbia.
Sevierville.
Moscow.
Chattanooga.
Mason's  Hall.
Bethesda.
Shiloh.
Milton.
Loudon.
Eaton.
Lineport.
Magnolia.
Macedonia.
Linden.
Greenbottom.
Benton.
Decatur.
Manchester.
Ell  Grove.
Houston.
Vernon.
Decaturville.
Hamburg.
Smyrna.
Montezuma.
Henryville.
Lanefield.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thursday  af.  f.  m.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
3d  Friday.
1st  Friday.
Friday  after  f.  m.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Monday.
1st  Friday.
3d  Friday.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  af.  f.  m
3d  Saturday.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
Saturday  af.  f.  m.
2d  Monday.
Wed.  on  or  af.  f.  m.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
4th  Friday.
Friday  on  or  af.  f.  m.
3d  Wednesday.
1st  Monday.
Mon.  af.  3d  Sunday.
1st  &  3d-Mondays.
2d  Saturday.
Friday  bef.  f.  m.
Sal.  bef.  2d  Sunday.
3d  Tuesday.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
3d  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
2d  Wednesday.
1st  Monday.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Monday.
1st  Monday.
1st  Monday.
4th  Saturday.
Tues.  on  or  af.  f.  m.
Last  Saturday.
1st  Monday.
Fri.  on  or  af.  f.  m.
Thur.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Friday  bef.  f.  m.
William  Burns.
Allen  Jones.
S.  H.  Holmes.
James  V.  Doss.
J.  N.  Witt.
J.  R.  Gardner.
Thomas  J.  Atkins.
William  P.  Morris.
W.  R.  Evans.
H.  T.  Cox.
Moor  J.  Irwin.
James  D.  Easley.
James  C.  Harris.
.  W.  F.  Abernathy.
T.  N.  Hughes.
B.  F.  Martin.
John  Dilling.
George  A.  Fain.
James  P.  Roach.
W.  M.  Collier.
James  W.  Lewis.
Benjamin  B.  Bass.
John  H.  Devereux.
J.  M.  Hammer.
E.  Kennon.
John  C.  Warner.
J.  F.  Crain.
William  Y.  Bennett.
A.  W.  Canon.
W.  W.  McKnight.
J.  J.  Harrison.
J.  H.  Sinclair.
L.  D.  Hargis.
T.  B.  Summers.
W.  M.  Carson.
R.  M.  Thomas.
R.  B.  Shore.
B.  F.  Greenlee.
Jacob  F.  Zeigler.
S.  N.  Berger.
Gilbert  R.  Thompson.
L.  B.  Gant.
William  Wilson.
John  R.  Cormac.
J.  W.  Moore.
Robert  Cook.
Hiram  Johnson.
L.  Peningtou.
D.  Whitaker.

--- Sayfa 409 ---
TENNESSEE.
397
No.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
225  Fredonia,
226  Tipton,
227  Cherry  Mount,
228  Valley  Forge,
229  Friendship,
230  Cuba,
231  Morristown,
232  Gravel  Hill,
233  Salem,
234  Newport.
235  Woodbury,
236  Washington,
237  Laguardo,
238  Dashiell,
239  Hermon,
240  Beech,
241  Ducktown,
242  Thyatira,
243  Taylorsville,
244  Masters,
245  Woodville,
246  New  Market,
247  John  Hart,
248  Vesper,
249  New  Middleton
250  Centre  Point,
251  Friendship,
252  Bone,
253  Chota,
254  Edgefield,
255  Sycamore,
256  Bradshaw,
259  Livingston,
260  Clarksburg,
261  Mountain,
262  Tullahoma,
263  Ellen,
264  Adams,
265  Farmville,
266  Cookvffle,
267  Saltillo,
268  Reliance,
269  Fuller,
270  Phoenix,
271  Tannehill,
272  Burton,
273  Caldwell,
274  Johnson,
275  New  Castle,
Fredonia.
Mt.  Zion.
Mulloys.
Oakwood.
Jack's  Creek.
Cuba.
Morristown.
Gravel  Hill.
Salem.
Newport.
Woodbury.
Washington.
Laguardo.
Elizabeth  ton.
Beech  Grove.
Beech.
Copper  Hill.
Bradyville.
Taylorsville.
Knoxville.
Woodville.
New  Market.
Peacher's  Mill.
Big  Spring.
New  Middleton.
Centre  Point.
Friendship.
Pond  Hill.
Concord.
Nashville.
Sycamore  Mills.
Simpson's  Store.
Livingston.
Clarksburg.
Spencer.
Tullahoma.
Double  Bridges.
Jenkins'  Depot.
Farmville.
Cookville.
Saltillo.
Bellbuckle.
Ripley.
Dover.
Goodlettsville.
White  Hill.
Big  Bottom.
Fall  Branch.
New  Castle.
1st  Saturday.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Monday.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Thursday.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Thursday.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
Monday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Monday.
1st  Monday.
2d  &  4th  Monday.
1st  Monday.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Fri.  b.  4th  Sunday.
2d  Monday.
3d  Monday.
Friday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
4th  Wednesday.
3d  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
Tues.  on  or  af.  f.  m.
2d  Monday.
1st  Wednesday.
2d  Thursday.
2d  Saturday.
Thur.  on  or  af.  f.  m.
Thur.  af.  3d  Monday.
Friday  on  or  af.  f.  m.
1st  Monday.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  Thursday.
4th  Thursday.
3d  Saturday.
1st  Thursday.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Monday.
1st  Saturday.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thur.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
John  D.  Tucker.
M.  Drummonds.
S.  B.  Biggsbee.
Thos.  M.  Reynolds.
Stephen  Massengill.
T.  W.  Hines.
L.  F..  Leefer.
John  M.  Hamm.
H.  G.  Blanton.
William  L.  De  Witt.
M.  W.  McKnight.
William  P.  Darwin.
J.  J.  Wood.
J.  J.  Patton.
Robert  Taylor.
John  Goodman.
A.  B.  Witherspoon.
John  W.  Paxton.
Jacob  Gingery.
M.  P.  Massengill.
Harrold  P.  Carney.
E.  C.  Talley.
J.  A.  Wright.
W.  C.  Larue.
A.  T.  Fielder.
Michael  Flowers.
J.  M.  Rodgers.
Theo.  B.  Hamlin.
Moses  W.  Winters.
R.  J.  Williams.
Q.  D.  Elder.
Henry  McCall.
W.  B.  Parker.
A.  M.  Holt.
Paschal  Williams.
James  M.  Kirk.
S.  W.  Mitchell.
T.  W.  Pendergrass.
William  Hawk.
M.  H.  Webb.
J.  N.  Wardlaw.
William  Cook.
W.  H.  Joyner.
Jackson  V.  Jones.
M.  Trotter.
Jacob  Hamilton.
P.  A.  Walker.

--- Sayfa 410 ---
398
world's  masonic  register.
No.
Lodge.
Location.  Time  of  Meeting.  Master.
Maynardsville.  Tues.  af.  2d  Monday.  J.  M.  Harbison.
Sneedville.  Wed.  af.  4th  Monday.  Loring  K.  Tyler.
Fremont.  1st  Saturday.  John  Baxter.
West  Point.  Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.   Joseph  D.  Fuller.
Sale  Creek.  2d  &  4th  Saturdays.  J.  N.  Aikens.
Jamestown.  1st  Monday.  W.  S.  Bledsoe.
Black  Jack.  Sat.  b.  2d  Sunday.    John  S.  Hart.
Waverly.    William  M.  Cooley.
Pelham.    Henry  S.  Sheid.
Newbern.    Massalon  Whitten.
Newburg.    William  H.  Flanigan.
Farmington.    W.  M.  Bobinson.
Marlborough.    B.  H.  Nesbitt.
Memphis.    Charles  Scott.
Mouth  of  Sandy   A.  W.  Kussell.
Pleasant  Green.    A.  Barksdale.
SweetWater.    S.  B.  Haines.
Nashville.    Henry  L.  Claiborne.
276  Turley,
277  Sneedville,
278  Tyre,
279  West  Point,
280  Sale  Creek,
281  Jamestown,
282  C.  Fountain,
283  Union  Chapel,
284  Felix  Grundy,
285  Newbern,
286  Newburg,
287  Farmington,
288  Marlborough,
289  Leila  Scott,
290  Pleasant  Ridge,
291  Pleasant  Green,
292  Sweet  Water,
293  Claiborne,
GRAND   CHAPTER.
Organized  between  5819  and  5826.
The  Grand  Chapter  holds  its  Annual  Convocations  in  the  City  of  Nashville,
commencing  the  second  Monday  in  October.  It  has  44  Chapters  under  its
jurisdiction,  2  of  which  have  forfeited  their  charters.  A  Dispensation  for  a  new
Chapter  was  issued  October,  5860.  This  Grand  Chapter  is  subordinate  to  the
General  Grand  Chapter.
SUBORDINATE  CHAPTERS.
No.  Name.
1  Cumberland.
2  Franklin.
3  Clarksville.
4  Lafayette.
9  Clinton.
11  Lafayette.
14  Paris.
15  Caledonia.
16  Yorkville.
17  Dresden.
18  Union.
19  Goodwill.
20  Pulaski.
21  Washington.
22  Penn.
No.       Name.
23  Pythagoras.
24  Pearl.
25  Lebanon.
26  Warren.
27  Eureka.
28  Haywood.
30*  Triune.
31  Trenton.
32  Quincy.
33  Obion.
34  Bolivar.
35  Wesley.
36  MorniDg  Sun.
37  Lexington.
38  Huntingdon.
No.       Name.
39  Cleveland.
40  Tannehill.
41*  Hughes.
42  Dyersburg.
43  Berlin.
44  Denmark.
45  Hiram.
46  Lewisburg.
47  Springfield.
48  Gallatin.
49  Hamilton.
50  Alexandria.
51  Winchester.
52  Charles  Soott.
*  Charters  forfeited.

--- Sayfa 411 ---
TENNESSEE.
399
GRAND    COUNCIL.
Organized  5847.
The  Grand  Council  holds  its  Annual  Convocations  on  the  second  Monday  in
October,  in  the  City  of  Nashville.  It  has  24  subordinate  Councils  under  its
jurisdiction,  2  of  which  were  chartered  in  October,  5860.  Members,  estimated,
400.
SUBORDINATE  COUNCILS.
Jo.
Name.
No.
Name.
No.
Name.
1 Nashville.
9 Pulaski.
18
Trojan.
2 Concordia.
10
Brownsville.
19
Denmark.
3 Franklin.
11
Excelsior.
20
Sacramento.
4 Clarksville.
12
Trenton.
21
Lebanon.
5 Liberty.
13
Jackson.
22
Murfreesboro'
6 Eureka.
14
Wesley.
23
Huntington.
7 Somerville.
16
Bolivar.
28
Yorkville.
8 Washington.
17
Caledonia.
29
Dresden.
GRAND    COMMANDERY.
Formed  October  12,  1859.
The  Annual  Conclaves  of  this  Grand  Commandery  are  held  in  the  City  of
Nashville,  commencing  on  Wednesday  after  the  second  Monday  in  October.  It
has  4  subordinate  Commanderies  under  its  jurisdiction,  having  165  members.
SUBORDINATE  COMMANDERIES.
No.
Name.
Location.
1 Nashville,
Nashville.
2 Yorkville,
Yorkville.
No.
Name.
Location.
3 De  Molay,
Columbia.
4 Cyrene,
Memphis.
SUBSCRIBERS'  NAMES.
BROWNSVILLE.
Rutledge,  Joseph  Marshall,  Clerk  of  Circuit  Court.    Brownsville,  58 ;  Hay-
wood chap.,  28 ;  Brownsville  coun.,  10.
CLAKKSVILLE.
McCulloch,  Thos.,  Merchant.     Past  Grand  Master  of  Grand  Lodge ;  Clarks-
ville, 89 ;  Clarksville  coun.,  4 ;  Nashville  com.,  1.
DYERSBTJRG,  Dyer  County.
Sampson,  P.  G.,  Attorney  at  Law.     Hess,  93  ;  Dyersburg  chap.,  42 ;  Trenton
coun.,  12 ;  Yorkville  com.,  2.

--- Sayfa 412 ---
400  world's  masonic  register.
gband  junction.
Bryant,  Rev.  D.  E.,  Merchant.     Montezuma,  222.
Jenkins,  I.  L.,  Marble  Dealer.     La  Grange,  81.
Pledge,  Win.  A.,  Marble  Dealer.     La  Grange,  81.
GBAVEL  HILL  P.  O.
Caffey,  E.  W.
JACKSON.
Morrill,  John  M.,  Attorney.     Jackson,  45  ;  Clinton  chap.,  9 ;  Jackson  coun.,
13.
LAFAYETTE.
Wilkinson,  P.  A.,  Clerk  and  Surveyor.     P.  M.,  Lafayette,  149.
LA  GRANGE.
Adams,  George  W.,  Justice.  P.  G.  Warden  Grand  Lodge  of  Tenn. ;  P.  M.,
La  Grange,  81 ;  P.  Sec,  Lafayette  chap.,  11 ;  Liberty  coun.,  5.
Firth,  Thomas  B.,  Justice  of  the  Peace.  La  Grange,  81;  Lafayette  chap.,  11;
Liberty  coun.,  5.
Howard,  D.  J.     Tr.,  La  Grange,  81.
Hunt,  D.  E.,  Planter.     La  Grange,  81 ;  Lafayette  chap.,  11.
McNamee,  Charles,  Merchant  Tailor.  La  Grange,  81 ;  Lafayette  chap.,  11 ;
Liberty  coun.,  5.
Pulliam,  M.  P.,  Tailor.     Sec,  La  Grange,  81.
MEMPHIS.
Andrews,  W.  H.,  Grocer  and  Commission  Merchant.  Angerona,  168  ;  Penn
chap.,  22  ;  Eureka  coun.,  6  ;  Cyrene  com.,  4.
Baugh,  E.  D.,  Mayor.     Angerona,  168.
Cash,  P.  M.,  Cotton  Broker.     Angerona,  168.
Pals,  T.,  Merchant.     Angerona,  168.
Pennie,  John  G.,  Attorney  at  Law.  Angerona,  168 ;  Penn  chap.,  22  ;  Eureka
coun.,  6.
Prankland,  N.  E.     Angerona,  168.
Gay,  William,  Grocer  and  Commission  Merchant.  Angerona,  168;  Penn
chap.,  22  ;  Eureka  coun.,  6.
Jones,  George  W.,  Druggist,  229  Main  St.    Angerona,  168.
King,  Henry  S.,  Merchant.  Angerona,  168  ;  Penn  chap.,  22  ;  Eureka  coun.,
6  ;  Cyrene  com.,  4.
Kortrecht,  C,  Attorney  at  Law.    Angerona,  168.
Levy,  Moses,  Merchant.     Keystone,  271,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Lusher,  H.  M.,  Sec.  and  Treas.  Memphis  Overton  Hotel.  P.  D.  Grand
Master  of  Grand  Lodge  of  Tenn. ;  Past  Thrice  111.  Grand  Master  of  Grand
Council  of  Tenn. ;  Angerona,  168.
Nevile,  I.,  Trader,  174  Main  St.  Angerona,  168  ;  G.  Washington  chap.,  51,
Miss.
Pearson,  S.  M.,  Merchant.    P.  M.,  Grenada,  31,  Miss.
Penn,  James,  Cashier  Branch  Planters'  Bank  of  Memphis.     Grand  Master  of

--- Sayfa 413 ---
TENNESSEE.  401
Tennessee ;  G.  H.  P.  of  G.  0.  of  Tenn. ;  and  P.  G.  H.  P.  of  Virginia ;  Past
Thrice  111.  G.  M.  of  Alabama;  P.M.,  Angerona,  168;  Pen  a  chap.,  22;  Eureka
coun.,  6 ;  Commander  of  Oyrene  com.,  4.     33d.
Potter,  T.  W.,  Merchant.     Brownsville,  58  ;  Chap.,  28  ;  Cyrene  com.,  4.
Prayer,  A.,  Merchant.     Angerona,  168.
Rambaugh,  G.  V.,  Book-keeper  at  Worsham  House.     Angerona,  168.
Richardson,  C.  A.,  Civil  Engineer.  Angerona,  168 ;  Penn  chap.,  22  ;  Eureka
coun.,  6  ;  Cyrene  com.,  4.
Saunders,  D.  D.     Angerona,  168.  '
Scott,  Charles,  Lawyer.  Master,  Leila  Scott,  289 ;  P.  G.  M.  of  Miss. ;  P.  G.
H.  P.  of  Miss. ;  Supreme  Grand  Council  of  the  A.  and  A.  Scottish  Rite  for  the
Southern  jurisdiction  of  U.  S.     33d.
Smither,  G.,  Cotton  Broker.  South  Memphis,  118  ;  Penn  chap.,  22  ;  Eureka
coun.,  6 ;  Cyrene  com.,  4.
Thornton,  G.  B.,  Physician.     Angerona,  168.
Todd,  J.  L.,  Wholesale  Grocer.     Angerona,  168  ;  Penn  chap.,  22.
Wolfe,  Tobias,  Wharf  Master.   Memphis,  9 ;  Clinton  chap.,  9 ;  Eureka  coun.,  6.
Worsham,  J.  J.,  Proprietor  Worsham  House.  Angerona,  168 ;  Scribe.,  Penn
chap.,  22;  Eureka  coun.,  6;  Generalissimo,  Cyrene  com.,  4.     33d.
MTJREREESBOB.O'.
McKnight,  John  J.,  Coach-maker.     W.  M.,  Mount  Moriah,  18  ;  P.  S.,  Pytha-
goras chap.,  23;  Murfreesboro'  coun.,  22.
Steward,  James  W.,  Steward  House.     Mount  Moriah,  18.
NASHVILLE.
Fuller,  Charles  A.     Grand  Sec.  of  Grand  Lodge,  Grand  Chap.,  and  Grand
Coun. ;  P.  G.  H.  P.  of  Grand  Chap. ;  P.  G.  Master  of  Grand  Lodge ;  Phoenix,
131 ;  Cumberland  chap.,  1 ;  Nashville  coun.,  1 ;  Nashville  com.,  1.
NEWBEBN,  Dyer  County.
Whitten,  Massalon,  Brick-mason.      Newbern,  285  ;    Yorkville   chap.,  16  ;
Nashville  coun.,  1 ;  Yorkville  com.,  2.
WINCHESTER.
Frizzell,  John,  Attorney  at  Law.     Past  Grand  Master  of  Grand  Lodge ;  P.
M.,  Cumberland,  158 ;    Cumberland  chap.,  1 ;    Nashville  coun.,  1  ;    Nashville
com.,  1 ;  Past  Grand  Lecturer  of  Grand  Lodge.
TOKKVILLE,  Gibson  County.
Hinson,  Wm.  H.,  Steam  Mill  Engineer.     Yorkville,  115 ;  Yorkville  chap.,
16 ;  Yorkville  com.,  2.
The  Duke  of  Wellington  was  initiated  into  Freemasonry  December  7, 1790,
in  Lodge  494,  then  held  at  Trim,  Ireland,  of  which  Brother  William  Elliott  was
W.  M.  His  signature  "A.  Wesley"  is  still  extant.  The  Lodge  was  afterward
removed  to  Dublin.
In  a  Lodge,  Masons  meet  as  members  of  one  family ;  all  prejudices,  therefore,
on  account  of  religion,  country,  or  private  opinion,  are  removed.

--- Sayfa 414 ---
402  world's  masonic  register.
POPULARITY  OF  FREEMASONRY.
The  onward  progress  of  Freemasonry  within  the  last  ten  years  is  not  only
gratifying,  but  is  an  evidence  that  the  intelligent  portion  of  the  human  family
appreciate  the  heaven-born  principles  of  the  institution,  and  the  unselfish
benevolence  of  its  votaries.  There  are  few  men  impressed  with  the  divine  image
so  constituted  as  to  be  unwilling  to  recognize  deeds  of  mercy,  love,  and  charity,
performed  by  their  fellow-men  from  pure  motives  of  humanity.  There  is  some-
thing in  the  interior  consciousness  of  all  intelligent  beings  that  recognizes  and
acknowledges  the  good  which  it  sees  in  others,  however  trivial  the  manifestations
may  be,  so  that  they  proceed  from  a  pure  heart  and  a  sincere  desire  to  do  good
— to  benefit  their  brother  man.  A  kind  word  fitly  spoken,  a  benevolent  deed  in
the  hour  of  need,  will  most  surely  actwith  a  magnetic  charm,  and  their  influ-
ence be  impressed  deeply  and  indelibly  upon  the  human  heart.  Within  the
breast  of  every  man,  according  to  the  sensibility  of  his  perceptions,  there  is  a
chord  which  attunes  in  harmony  with  the  humanizing  principles  of  Freemasonry,
and  the  obligations  resting  upon  its  membership,  to  promote  the  welfare  of  their
fellow-beings.  Men  of  intelligent  and  benevolent  impulses,  wherever  they  have
had  the  opportunity  of  acquiring  a  knowledge  of  the  teachings  of  Freemasonry,
and  the  quiet  deeds  of  charity  performed  by  its  members,  have  never  failed  to
desire  to  aid  in  disseminating  its  pure  precepts,  and  to  assist  in  its  works  of
humanity  ;  and  hence  we  find  not  only  the  Father  of  his  Country,  the  immortal
"Washington,  but  the  illustrious  patriots  of  every  age  and  nation  bowing  at  the
altars  of  Masonry.  Xo  institution  or  association  of  men,  from  the  beginning  of
the  world,  ever  embraced  so  many  good  and  true  men  among  their  membership,
as  Freemasonry,  and  surely  it  could  not  be  from  any  selfish  motives  that  the
noble,  the  virtuous,  the  learned,  and  the  benevolent  sought  admission  into  our
mystic  Order.  What  could,  then,  have  prompted  them,  if  not  its  pure  princi-
ples, its  high  moral  teachings,  and  its  practical  charities?  It  does  not  change
the  character  of  Freemasonry,  nor  can  it  be  chargeable  to  its  principles  that
some  bad  men  are  admitted  into  the  Order.  Such  necessarily  must  be  the  case
with  all  institutions  governed  by  imperfect  man ;  but  in  judging  the  institution,
the  excrescences  should  not  be  the  criterion,  by  no  means  :  these  once  attached
to  the  Order,  fraternal  sympathy  demands  that  every  exertion  shall  be  made  to
purge  them  and  make  them  clean.  The  institution  should  alone  be  judged  by
the  good  and  virtuous  of  its  membership,  as  these  would  not  continue  their  at-
tachment to  it  if  its  teachings  and  precepts  were  not  conformable  to  the  strictest
morality.  That  men  of  irreproachable  character,  of  sterling  integrity,  and  sound
and  pure  morals,  do  continue  their  connection  with  the  institution,  labor  to  pro-
mote its  prosperity,  bestow  their  time  and  attention  in  extending  its  principles,
and  feel  a  pride  in  their  association  with  the  Order,  is  the  strongest  evidence  of
the  purity  of  its  principles,  its  high  moral  teachings,  and  practical  philanthropy.
The  popularity  of  Freemasonry  is  mainly  owing  to  the  excellence  of  its  teach-
ings and  its  pure  morality,  which  accord  with  the  internal  perceptions  of  all
good  and  true  men,  and  hence  its  wide  extension  throughout  the  civilized
world.

--- Sayfa 415 ---
TEXAS.
GRAND  LODGE.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  Texas  was  organized  December  20th,  5837.  The
Annual  Communications  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Texas  have  been  held  alter-
nately in  eastern,  middle,  and  western  Texas.  The  Annual  Communication  in
June,  5860,  was  held  at  Lagrange,  Fayette  County.  Its  next  Annual  Communi-
cation will  be  held  at  Houston,  June  10th,  5861.  By  a  resolution  adopted  in
5857,  the  Grand  Lodge  is  to  be  permanently  located  at  its  Grand  Communica-
tion in  5861.  Its  Sessions  commence  on  the  second  Monday  in  June.  The
Grand  Lodge  consists  of  the  Grand  Officers  and  District  Deputy  Grand  Masters,
Past  Grand  and  Past  Deputy  Grand  Masters,  and  Past  Grand  "Wardens,  Past
Masters,  and  Masters  and  Wardens  of  its  constituent  Lodges,  and  the  surviving
original  members  of  the  Grand  Lodge  at  its  organization  on  the  20th  of  Decem-
ber, 5837.
The  revenue  of  the  Grand  Lodge  is  derived  from  the  following  sources  : —
For  Dispensations  for  new  Lodges  ....     $25  00
For  Charters,  in  addition
25  00
For  every  Affiliation
1  00
For  every  Degree    1  00
For  each  Dispensation  for  Degrees  .        .        .        .         2  00
Grand  Lodge  dues  for  each  Member  ....  50
For  Grand  Lodge  Diplomas
2  00
Each  Degree  conferred  in  Grand  Lodge     ...  20  00
The  Grand  Lodge  had  chartered  since  its  organization  252  Lodges,  28  of
which  have  ceased  to  exist;  13  of  the  remaining  224  Lodges  made  no  returns  at
the  Annual  Communication  in  June,  5860.  The  211  Lodges  which  made  re-
turns sum  up  as  follows  :  Initiations,  941 ;  Passings,  793 ;  Eaisings,  736  ;  Affilia-
tions, 525 ;  Dimitted,  443 ;  Expulsions,  24 ;  Suspensions,  105  ;  Rejections,  439  ;
Deaths,  135  ;  Total  number  of  Members  returned,  8215 ;  Dues  paid,  $7954.
The  Officers  for  the  present  year  are : —
John  B.  McMahon,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
Geo.  W.  Van  Vleck,  B.  W.  Deputy  Grand  Master.
Jno.  B.  Fretwell,  B.  W.  Senior  Grand  Warden.
T.  J.  H.  Anderson,  B.  W.  Junior  Grand  Warden.
Andrew  Neill,  B.  W.  Grand  Treasurer.
•A.  S.  Buthven,  B.  W.  Grand  Secretary.
Rev.  Henry  Thomas,  B.  W.  Grand  Chaplain.
S.  G.  Newton,  E.  W.  Grand  Orator.
A.  M.  M.  Upshaw,  E.  W.  Grand  Marshal.
(403)

--- Sayfa 416 ---
404  world's  masonic  register.
W.  H.  McCutcheon,  B.  W.  Senior  Grand  Deacon.
Jno.  Stevens,  R.  W.  Junior  Grand  Deacon.
Robt.  Brewstek,    1  _   __   -       ,  „,         j
T  „  „  (■  E.  W.  Grand  Stewards.
J.  M.  Bookman,      j
J.  L.  Winston,  E.  W.  Grand  Pursuivant.
Ohakles  Haines,  W.  Grand  Tyler.
EARLY  HISTORY  OF  MASONRY  IN  TEXAS.
We  copy  the  following  very  interesting  article  from  the  reprint  of  "  Proceed-
ings of  Grand  Lodge  of  Texas,"  published  by  the  B.  W.  Grand  Secretary,  A.  S.
RUTHVEN.
"  As  I  took  an  active  part  in  laying  the  first  foundations  of  Freemasonry  in
this  country,  originated,  and  was  personally  present  at,  the  first  meeting  ever  held
here,  and  cognizant  of  the  earliest  steps  taken  for  the  organization  of  a  Lodge,
I  place  upon  record  the  following  facts,  which  may  be  of  interest,  perhaps,  to
the  fraternity  hereafter,  and  would  otherwise  be  lost,  as  I  am  now  the  only  one
living  of  the  five  brethren  who  originated  Holland  Lodge.
"  In  the  winter  of  1834^5,  five  Master  Masons,  who  had  made  themselves
known  to  each  other,  consulted  among  themselves,  and,  after  various  interviews
and  much  deliberation,  resolved  to  take  measures  to  establish  a  Lodge  of  their
Order  in  Texas.  .  This  resolution  was  not  formed  without  a  full  appreciation  of
its  consequences  to  the  individuals  concerned.  Every  movement  in  Texas  was
watched  at  that  time  with  jealousy  and  distrust  by  the  Mexican  government,
and  already  had  its  spies  and  emissaries  denounced  some  of  our  best  citizens  as
factionists  and  disaffected  persons  ;  already  were  the  future  intended  victims  of
a  despotic  power  being  selected.  It  was  well  known  that  Freemasonry  was
particularly  odious  to  the  Catholic  priesthood,  whose  influence  in  the  country  at
that  time  was  all-powerful.  The  dangers,  therefore,  attendant  upon  an  organi-
zation of  Masons  at  this  time,  which  was  '  trying  men's  souls,'  were  neither  few
nor  unimportant.  But  zeal  for  a  beloved  institution,  a  belief  that  it  would  be
beneficial  at  a  period  when  society  seemed  especially  to  need  some  fraternal  bonds
to  unite  them  together,  predominated ;  all  fears  of  personal  consequences  were
thrown  aside,  and  the  resolution  to  establish  a  Lodge,  as  above  mentioned,  was
adopted.  The  five  brethren  were  John  H.  Wharton,  Asa  Brigham,  James  A.
E.  Phelps,  Alexander  Russell,  and  Anson  Jones,  and  they  appointed  a  time  and
place  of  meeting  to  concert  measures  to  carry  their  resolution  into  effect.  In
the  mean  time  another  Master  Mason  came  into  their  plans, — Brother  J.  P.
Caldwell.  The  place  of  meeting  was  back  of  the  town  of  Brazoria,  near  the
place  known  as  General  John  Austin's,  in  a  little  grove  of  wild  peach  or  laurel,
and  which  had  been  selected  as  a  family  burying-ground  by  that  distinguished
soldier  and  citizen.  The  spot  was  secluded,  and  out  of  the  way  of '  cowans  and
eaves-droppers,'  and  they  felt  they  were  alone.  Here,  and  under  such  circum-
stances, at  ten  o'clock  in  the.  morning  of  a  day  in  March,  1835,  was  held  the  first,
formal  Masonic  meeting  in  Texas,  as  connected  with  the  establishment  and  con-
tinuance of  Masonry  in  this  country.  The  six  brethren  I  have  mentioned  were
all  present  there ;  and  it  was  concluded  to  apply  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Louis-
iana for  a  Dispensation  to  form  and  open  a  Lodge,  to  be  called  Holland  Lodge,

--- Sayfa 417 ---
TEXAS.  405
in  honor  to  the  then  M.  W.  G.  Master  of  that  body,  J.  H.  Holland.  The  funds
were  raised  by  a  contribution  to  defray  the  expenses,  to  which  each  contributed
as  he  felt  willing  and  able.  A  petition  was  in  due  time  drawn  up  and  signed  by
them,  which  was  forwarded  to  New  Orleans,  having  been  previously  signed  by
another  Master  Mason,  Brother  W.  1).  C.  Hall,  and  perhaps  one  or  two  more  ;
but  of  this  I  do  not  recollect.  The  officers  named  in  the  petition  were — For
W. M.,  Anson  Jones;  S.  W.,  Asa  Brigham;  J.  "W.,  J.  P.  Caldwell,  who  filled
those  offices,  respectively,  until  the  close  of  1837.  The  Dispensation  was
granted,  after  some  delay,  to  these  Brethren,  and  Holland  Lodge,  No.  36,  U.  D.,
was  instituted  and  opened  at  Brazoria,  on  the  27th  of  December,  1835.  Brother
Phelps  was  chosen  Treasurer,  and  M.  C.  Patton,  Secretary;  the  other  officers  I
do  not  recollect.  The  Lodge  held  its  meetings  at  Brazoria,  in  the  second  story
of  the  old  Court-house,  which  room  was  afterward  occupied  by  St.  John's
Lodge,  No.  5.  About  this  time  the  difficulties  with  Mexico  broke  out  into  open
hostilities,  and  our  work  was  very  much  retarded  by  that  circumstance,  and  by
the  members  having  to  be  absent  in  the  service  of  the  country.  Still,  there
were  a  few  others,  from  time  to  time,  introduced  into  the  Order,  either  by  re-
ceiving the  degrees  or  by  affiliation.  The  Lodge  struggled  on  until  February,
1836,  when  I  presided  over  its  last  meeting  at  Brazoria.  I  well  recollect  the
night,  and  the  fact  that  Brother  Fannin,  who  one  month  after  became  so  cele-
brated for  his  misfortunes  and  those  of  his  unfortunate  party  at  Goliad,  acted  as
Senior  Deacon.  It  seemed,-indeed,  that  the  gloom  which  prevailed  in  the  Lodge
that  night  was  a  foreshadowing  of  its  and  their  unhappy  fate,  which  was  so  soon
to  overtake  both.
"  In  March,  Brazoria  was  abandoned.  Urea  soon  after  took  possession  of  the
place  at  the  head  of  a  detachment  of  the  Mexican  army,  and  the  records,  books,
jewels,  and  everything  belonging  to  the  Lodge  were  utterly  destroyed  by  them,
and  our  members  were  scattered  in  every  direction.  Brothers  Wharton,  Phelps,
and  myself,  joined  the  Texan  troops  on  the  Colorado,  about  the  18th  of  March.
In  the  mean  time,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Louisiana  had  issued  a  Charter  for  Hol-
land Lodge,  No.  36,  and  it  was  brought  over  to  Texas  by  Brother  John  M.
Allen.  This,  together  with  some  letters  from  the  Grand  Secretary,  was  handed
to  me  by  Brother  Allen,  on  the  prairie  between  Groce's  and  San  Jacinto,  while
we  were  on  the  march,  and  carried  by  me  in  my  saddle-bags  to  the  encampment
of  the  army  on  Buffalo  Bayou,  at  Lynchburg.  Had  we  been  beaten  here,  Santa
Anna  would  have  captured  the  Charter  of  Holland  Lodge,  at  San  Jacinto,  as
Urea  had  the  Dispensation  for  it,  at  Brazoria.  Such  an  event,  however,  was
impossible.  The  Charter  and  papers  were  taken  safely  to  Brazoria ;  but,  as  the
■  members  had  been  lessened  in  numbers  by  death,  or  scattered  in  the  army,  and
elsewhere  in  the  service  of  the  country,  no  attempt  was  ever  made  to  revive  the
work  of  the  Lodge  at  that  place.
"  In  October,  1837,  however,  it  was  reopened  by  myself  and  others,  at  the
City  of  Houston,  having  then  been  in  existence  about  two  years.
"  In  the  mean  time  two  other  Lodges,  with  charters  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Louisiana,  were  established  in  Texas,— Milam,  at  Nacogdoches,  and  McFarlane,
at  San  Augustine.  Delegates  from  these,  and  from  Holland  Lodge,  met  in
Convention  at  Houston,  in  the  winter  of  1837-8,  and  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the
Republic  was  formed.    By  advice  and  direction  of  this  body,  the  three  subordi-

--- Sayfa 418 ---
406
world's  masonic  register.
nate  Lodges  transferred  their  allegiance  from  Louisiana  to  their  own  Grand
Lodge,  surrendered  their  Charters  to  Louisiana,  and  received  others  from
Texas;  and  Holland  Lodge,  No.  36,  under  the  former,  became  Holland  Lodge,
No.  1,  under  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  Lone  Star  Republic.  By  this  course,  the
causes  of  the  many  difficulties  which  have  afflicted  so  many  of  the  Grand  Lodges
of  the  United  States  were  considered  and  obviated  in  the  formation  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Texas.
"  Holland  Lodge,  No.  36,  was  the  only  one  established  in  Texas  prior  to  the
Revolution  which  separated  her  from  Mexico.
"  Such  is  a  brief  but  faithful  sketch  of  the  first  establishment  of  Freemasonry
in  Texas.  It  was  founded,  like  our  political  institutions,  amid  the  stern  con-
comitants of  adversity  and  war,  but  its  foundations  were  laid  broad  and  deep ;
and  upon  them  has  been  raised  a  superstructure  of  strength  and  beauty,  symme-
trical in  its  proportions  and  vast  in  its  dimensions,  which  I  trust  will  rise  '  usque
ad  astro,,'  and  continue  as  a  beacon  to  guide  and  cheer  worthy  Masons  on  their
journey  of  life,  and  against  which  the  wasting  storms  of  time  shall  beat  in  vain,
and  the  restless  waves  of  persecution  dash  themselves  to  destruction  in  angry
foam ;  while  the  presiding  genius  of  the  institution,  from  its  lofty  walls  shall
ever  continue  to  exclaim,  in  emphatic  tones,  to  be  heard  by  all, — East,  West,
North,  and  South, —
"'Procul!  Oprocul!  este  profani !'  '  Tu  que  invade  viam.'  '  Far  hence,  ye
profane  !  Welcome,  ye  initiated,  to  these  glorious  courts  1  Tread  ye  them
aright  I' "
SUBORDINATE   LODGES.
No.       Lodge.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
1  Holland,
Houston.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
Geo.  Goldthwaite.
3  Red  Land,
San  Augustine.
1st  Wednesday.
H.  M.  Kinsey.
5  St.  John's,
Columbia.
Night  of  full  moon.
D.  Walcott.
6  Harmony,
Galveston.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
James  Sorley.
7  Matagorda,
Matagorda.
1st  Saturday.
Henry  Thorp.
11  Milam,
Independence.
2d  Saturday.
W.  A.  Dallas.
12  Austin,
Austin.
1st  Saturday.
J.  M.  Swisher.
13  Constantino,
Bonham.
Last  Saturday.
W.  A.  Routh.
14  Trinity,
Livingston.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Geo.  Nelson.
16  Friendship,
Clarksville.
1st  Friday.
Smith  Ragsdale.
17  Orphan's  Friend ,  Anderson.
4th  Saturday.
Franklin  Brigance.
18  Washington,
Washington.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
James  G.  Heard.
19  Forrest,
Huntsville.
Last  Saturday.
A.  R.  Bowen.
20  Graham,
Brcnham.
4th  Saturday.
A.  M.  Lewis.
21  Lathrop,
Crockett.
Last  Saturday.
Wm.  M.  Taylor.
22  Marshall,
Marshall.
2d  Friday.
Richard  Peete.
23  Clinton,
Henderson.
Last  Saturday.
Thomas  Smith.
25  Montgomery,
Montgomery.
2d  Saturday.
Charles  Jones.
26  Olive  Branch,
Cincinnati.
3d  Saturday.
Jno.  Rodgers.
27  Paris,
Paris.
Sat.  of  or  aft.  f.  m.
Jacob  Long.
29  De  Witt  Clinton. ,  Jasper.
2d  Saturday.
B.  F.  Mott.
30  Gonzales,
Gonzales.
1st  Saturday.
E.  L.  Beaumont.
31  Palestine,
Palestine.
2d  Saturday.
A.  W.  Ford.
32  Sam  Houston,
Shelbyville.
2d  Saturday.
B.  F.  Powell.

--- Sayfa 419 ---
TEXAS.
40?
No.
LODOE.
Time  op  Meetiko.
Master.
84  Lafayette,
36  Lavaca,
37  Mount  Moriah,
38  Jefferson,
39  Leona  Union,
43  Douglas,
44  Alamo,
45  Euclid,
46  Florida,
48  Liberty,
61  St.  John's,
53  St.  John's,
54  Grand  Bluff,'
55  Gillespie,
56  Warren,
67  Larissa,
60  Mt.  Enterprise,
62  Woodville,
63  Kooky  Mount,
65  Joppa,
66  Cherino,
67  Hubert,
68  Caledonia,
69  Boston,
70  Temple,
71  Mount  Vernon,
72  Morton,
74  Springfield,
75  Brazos,
76  Cameron,
77  Concord,
79  Oasis,
80  Murchison,
81  Rio  Grande,
83  Terrill,
84  Indianola,
85  Pine  Bluff,
86  Tusculum,
87  New  Salem,
88  And'w  Jackson
89  San  Gabriel,
90  Waxahachie,
91  Tarrant,
92  Waco,
93  Augusta,
94  Goliad,
95  Sharon,
96  Colorado,
98  Canton,
Lagrange.
Port  Lavaca.
Cold  Springs.
Jefferson.
Leona.
Douglas.
San  Antonia.
Rusk.
Round  Top.
Liberty.
McKinney.
Tyler.
Grand  Bluff.
Wheelock.
Caldwell.
Larissa.
Mount  Enterprise.
Woodville.
Bunker  Hill.
Elysian  Fields.
Cherino.
Chapel  Hill.
Columbus.
Boston.
Mount  Pleasant.
Mount  Vernon.
Richmond.
Springfield.
Hempstead.
Clinton.
Concord  Church.
Dangerfield.
Halletsville.
Brownville.
Alto.
Indianola.
Troy.
Pine  Tree  Church.
New  Salem.
,    Linden.
Georgetown.
Waxahachie.
Tarrant.
Waco.
Augusta.
Goliad.
Sharon.
Webberville.
Canton.
3d  Saturday.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays
Sat.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
Fri.  before  2d  Sat.
2d  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
Last  Monday.
Last  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
4th  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
2d  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
2d  Friday.
2d  Saturday.
Wed.  on  or  a.  f.  m.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Monday.
1st  Wednesday.
3d  Friday.
4th  Friday.
2d  Friday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
3d  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
2d  Saturday.
2d  Wednesday.
1st  Saturday.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Saturday  a.  f.  m
Last  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
4th  Saturday.
1st  Friday.
Sat.  night  b.  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
Saturday  a.  f.  m.
2d  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
Jno.  Shearn.
Jno.  R.  Fretwell.
Leroy  Thomas.
S.  H.  Nimmo.
Wiley  G.  Davis.
J.  N.  Burk.
S.  G.  Newton.
W.  P.  Brittain.
Wm.  Hodge.
Chris.  Bryan.
Wm.  B.  Benge.
Wm.  J.  Smith.
Robt.  A.  Craig.
John  H.  Feeney.
John  L.  Winston.
G.  W.  Lane.
A.  M.  March.
G.  W.-  Van  Vleck.
Saml.  Gaut.
John  T.  Moore.
R.  P.  Wilson.
E.  S.  Buck.
■T.  W.  Harris,
John  W.  Leigh.
Elam  Riddle.
G.  L.  Rutherford.
Gustave  Cook.
John  R.  Henry.
D.  E.  Bartley.
J.  W.  Meador.
T.  W.  Winston.
Jacob  S.  Black.
T.  A.  Hester.
Geo.  Dye.
Daniel  Henderson.
Adam  Murdock.
B.  P.  Hammett.
T.  G.  Doyle.
Y.  D.  Harrington.
J.  R.  Watson.
De  Witt  C.  Booth.
Wm.  C.  Sweatt.
Wm.  W.  Poff.
J.  W.  Speight.
James  M.  Davis.
J.  S.  McCampbell.
T.  Q.  Allison.
M.  G.  Duce.
J.  J.  Flinn.

--- Sayfa 420 ---
408
world's  masonic  register.
No.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
99  Wharton,
101  Danville,
102  Unity,
103  Fairfield,
106  San  Jacinto,
108  Jacksonville,
109  Guadalupe,
110  Greenville,
111  Burleson,
112  Bloomfield,
113  Magnolia,
114  Prairie  Lea,
115  Kaufman,
116  Red  River,
117  Travis,
118  Starr,
119  Flora,
120  McDonald,
121  Mt.  Hope,
123  Texana,
124  Coletto,
12-3  Baylor,
127  Robert  Burns,
128  Cushney,
129  Brazos  Union,
131  Belmont,
132  Griffin,
133  Retreat,
134  Bethel,
135  Camden,
136  Newton,
137  Mt.  Horeb,
138  Neill,
139  Herschel,
140  Keechi,
141  Castillian,
142  Bethesda,
143  Ochiltree,
144  Pierce,
145  Walnut  Grove,
146  Winnsborough,
147  Planters,
148  Fort  Worth,
149  Truit,
150  Jamestown,
151  Cibolo,
152  Marlin,
153  Eclectic,
154  Cotton  Gin,
Wharton.
New  Danville.
Moscow.
Fairfield.
Danville.
Jacksonville.
Seguin.
Greenville.
Navarro.
Kaufman.
Magnolia.
Prairie  Lea.
Iron  Mountain.
Pine  Creek.
Sherman.
Starrville.
Quitman.
Linn  Flat.
Mt.  Hope.
Texana.
Yorktown.
Gay  Hill.
Concord.
San  Marcos.
Boonville.
Belmont.
Griffin.
Retreat.
Bourlandgreen.
Camden.
Burkville.
Gabriel  Mills.
Lexington.
Coffeeville.
Centreville.
Canton.
Gilmer.
Melrose.
Sterling.
Milam  co.
Winnsborough.
Plantersville.
Fort  Worth.
Truit's  Store.
Jamestown.
Guadalupe  co.
Marlin.
Fannin  co.
Cotton  Gin.
Sat.  night  b.  f.  m.
Thurs.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Saturday  a.  f.  m.
4th  Saturday.
Saturday  of  f.  m.
1st  Monday.
2d  Friday.
3d  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
4th  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Thursday.
1st  Saturday.
4th  Monday.
2d  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
Sat.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
3d  Saturday.
Mon.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
3d  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Friday.
Thur.  on  or  af.  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Last  Saturday.
1st  Wednesday   ,
2d  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
Friday  on  or  af.  f.  m.
4th  Saturday.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
3d  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
Saturday  after  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
3d  Saturday.
1st  Friday.
Sat.  on  or  af.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  3d  Sun.
J.  W.  Veazey.
W.  H.  Leach.
D.  R.  McCormick.
.  Thomas  B.  Grayson.
A.  Richards.
R.  R.  Jowell.
S.  Wright.
Tom  G.  Smith.
C.  T.  Bannerman.
R.  A.  Terrell.
W.  A.  Hagood.
Asa  Wright.
Win.  Howerton.
Marcus  W.  Caudle.
R.  T.  Lively.
Josh.  Starr.
Ed.  G.  Carter.
J.  M.  Liles.
G.  W.  Payne.
Jas.  A.  Woolfolk.
Jno.  H.  Johnson.
Thos.  M.  Barton.
G.  W.  Singletary.
Wm.  Barbee.
J.  P.  Mitchell.
Wm.  H.  Burris.
James  M.  Britian.
J.  H.  Dunham.
T.  J.  Mayo.
R.  D.  Wyche.
J.  J.  Smith.
John  W.  Atkinson.
J.  F.  Harris.
H.  W.  Collins.
R.  S.  Gould.
John  Towles.
R.  M.  Cade.
S.  H.  Hamil.
J.  T.  Garrett.
D.  C.  Connel.
W.  J.  Richards.
L.  C.  Warren.
Thos.  M.  Mathews.
Jas.  M.  Robberson.
Elisha  Tunnel.
W.  L.  Hawkens.
Jas.  Craik.
E.  J.  Holland.
Geo.  F.  Allison.

--- Sayfa 421 ---
TEXAS.
409
No.       LOD8E.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
155  Spring  Hill,
156  Hickory  Hill,
157  East  Trinity,
158  Wm.  M.  Taylor,
159  MoClellan,
160  Lancaster,
162  Murival,
163  Sumpter,
164  Honey  Grove,
165  Athens,
166  Belton,
168  Monroe,
169  Jas.  F.  Taylor,
170  San  Andres,
171  Bosque,
173  Mound  Prairie,
174  Corsicana,
175  Valley,
177  St.  Paul's,
178  E.  J.  Glover,
179  Hardeman,
180  Hopkins,
181  Post  Oak  Island,
182  Concrete,
183  Hopkinsville,
184  Hickory  Grove,
185  White  Oak,
186  Decatur,
187  Tyrian.
189  Corpus  Christi,
190  Refugio,
191  Havana,
193  Leon,
194  Jack  Titus,
195  Lyons,
196  Aquilla,
197  Gatesville,
198  Tyre,
199  De  Molay,
200  Alamita,
201  Denton,
202  James  A.  Baker,
203  Pine,
204  Mt.  Calm,
205  Walnut  Creek,
206  Frank  Sexton,
207  W.  P-.  Brittain,
208  McMahon,
209  Mantua,
Spring  Hill.
Hickory  Hill.
Rockwall.
Carmel.
Union  Hill.
Pleasant  Bun.
A.  Davis.
Sumpter.
Honey  Grove.
Athens.
Belton.
Madisonville.
Ash  Spring.
Cameron.
Bosqueville.
Mound  Prairie.
Corsicana.
Burnet.
Port  Sullivan.
Smyrna
Plum  Creek.
Black  Jack  Grove.
Post  Oak  Island.
Concrete.
Hopkinsville.
Mount  Vernon.
Saratoga.
Decatur.
Sabine  Pass.
Corpus  Christi.
Refugio.
Havana.
Bell  co.
Red  Oak  Grove.
Lyons.
Hillsboro'.
Gatesville.
Tennessee  Colony.
Sandies  Chapel.
Helena.
Louisville.
Ebenezer  Church.
Edom.
Mt.  Calm.
Veal's  Station.
Pittsburg.
Social  Chapel.
Lockhart.
Mantua.
2d  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
1st  Saturday  af.  f.  m.
1st  Saturday  of  f.  m.
1st  Saturday  af.  f.  m.
1st  Sat.  of  or  b.f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
3d  Saturday.
Sat.  night  b.  f.  m.
3d  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
4th  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
2d  Saturday.
Sat.  on  or  af.  f.  m.
3d  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
3d  Friday.
Saturday  af.  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
On  or  after  full  m.
Thur.  of  or  af.  f.  m.
2d  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Monday. '
2d  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Saturday  af.  f.  m
3d  Saturday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Sat.  af.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
3d  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
Sat  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
Sat.  bef.  lBt  Sunday.
Sat.  b.  4th  Sunday.
Sat.  on  or  af.  f.  m.
3d  Saturday.
4th  Friday.
4th  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
Saturday  af.  f.  m.
S.  L.  Cooke.
J.  W.  Alley.
J.  H.  B.  Jones.
Z.  Tate.
Jas.  R.  Hines.
Q.  A.  Sweatt.
A.  F.  Jordan.
Jno.  A.  Campbell.
A.  J.  Nicholson.
L.  W.  Moore.
D.  T.  Chamberlin.
John  Mclver.
John  J.  Kennedy.
Jno.  A.  Buckholts.
B.  F.  Richey.
J.  A.  Lawrence.
John  B.  Jones.
Thomas  Moore.
Thos.  J.  H.  Anderson.
E.  J.  Glover.
Len  Barnett.
W.  T.  Box.
I.  J.  Kidd.
T.  J.  Stell.
Milvern  Harrald.
W.  J.  Smith.
J.  H.  Edwards.
W.  W.  O.  Stanfield.
J.  R.  Burch.
Jno.  Curr.
L.  M.  Rogers.
R.  Y.  Hamilton.
N.  S.  White.
J.  G.  Dalby.
A.  C.  Isaacs.
Jno.  C.  Sneed.
Jno.  Armstrong.
A.  L.  Porter.
H.  L.  Conn.
G.  M.  Reese.
T.  J.  Dorsett.
J.  C.  Dickie.
W.  C.  Lee.
James  H.  Dabney.
John  Matlock.
Ebb.  Bolton.
Jacob  Reeder.
Jonathan  Nix.
C.  H.  Wysong.

--- Sayfa 422 ---
410
world's  masonic  register.
Lodge.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
210  Gainesville,
214  Farmersville,
215  Stedman,
216  Twin  Sisters,
217  Stanfield,
218  JohnE. Cravens,
219  Millville,
220  Onion  Creek,
221  Bright  Star,
222  Parson's,
223  Bellville,
224  Butler,
224  Miller,
225  San  Saba,
226  Brahan,
227  Round  Rock,
228  New  Port,
229  Randolph,
230  Ocean,
231  Sampson,
232  Lampasas,
233  Eutaw,
234  White  Rock,
235  Piano,
236  Relief,
237  Lively,
238  Relief,
239  San  Felipe,
240  Fayetteville,
241  Torbert,
242  Comanche,
243  Sanford,
244  Gamble,
245  Solomon,
246  Sulphur  Bluff,
247  Brazos,
248  Ruthven,
249  Jackson,
250  Black  Point,
251  Sexton,
252  Hondo,
Gainesville.
Farmersville.
Newton.
Blanco.
Denton.
Dresden.
Millville.
Union  School-house.
Bright  Star  P.  O.
Parson's  Seminary.
Bellville.
Butler.
Lodge  Room,  Hunt  co
San  Saba.
Bethesda.
Round  Rock.
New  Port.
Randolph.
Weatherford.
Oak  Island.
Lampasas.
Eutaw.
Walnut  Grove.
Piano.
Rush  Creek.
Faucett  &  Davis's  St
Jacksboro'.
San  Felipe.
Fayetteville.
Turner's  Point.
Comanche.
Shelby  co.
Bastrop.
Gray  Rock  P.  0.
Sulphur  Bluff.
Millican.
Backbone  Valley
Pinetown.
St.  Mary's.
Sexton.
Hondo  Valley.
1st  Saturday.
Saturday  af.  f.  m.
3d  Saturday.
Sat.  on  or  af.  f.  in.
Last  Saturday.
Sat.  on  or  af.  f.  m.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Thursday.
4th  Saturday.
Sat.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
.4th  Friday.
3d  Saturday.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays,
1st  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
1st  Sat.  af.  f.  m.
3d  Thursday.
Sat.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  b.  f.  m.
.  1st  Thursday.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Sat.  af.  f.  m.
4th  Saturday.
Sat.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  af.  f.  m.
Sat.  evening  b.  f.  m.
4th  Saturday.
Fri.  night  b.  f.  m.
Fri.  on  or  af.  f.  m.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
3d  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
Geo.  Y.  Bird.
B.  R.  Houghton.
J.  S.  Irvine.
Jas.  M.  Patton.
Gibson  Myers.
Jno.  B.  Jones.
J.  A.  Lee.
J.  H.  Stanley.
W.  S.  Petty.
T.  M.  Rector.
Zimri  Hunt.
Thos.  A.  Gaston.
C.  R.  Bryant.
J.  B.  Harrell.
Jno.  R.  King.
Jno.  C.  Black.
N.  N.  G.  A.  Mize.
Jas.  L.  Richards.
A.  F.  Corning.
M.  M.  Michau.
Jesse  M.  Mill.
James  P.  Brown.
W.  H.  Witt.
Geo.  R.  Tantis.
R.  M.  Phillips.
W.  L.  David.
F.  G.  Faucett.
W.  Cook.
Wm.  R.  Pollard.
C.  K.  Vance.
Chas.  Haynes.
E.  Sanford.
G.  W.  Hagey.
A.  G.  V.  Doney.
C.  G.  Lyon.
W.  A.  Dallas.
A.  H.  Cavin.
R.  C.  Brigman.
C.  K.  Stribling.
B.  H.  Munnerlyn.
G.  W.  Robbins.
GRAND    CHAPTER.
The  Grand  Chapter  of  Texas  was  organized  in  5850.  It  is  subordinate  to
the  General  Grand  Chapter.  At  its  eleventh  Annual  Convocation  in  June,
5860,  it  had  70  subordinate  Chapters  enrolled  under  its  jurisdiction,  2  of

--- Sayfa 423 ---
TEXAS.
411"
which  were  suspended,  4  made  no  returns,  and  the  returns  of  2  were  rejected.
The  returns  of  those  which  were  received  (62)  give  the  following  statistics:
Total  number  of  contributing  Members,  2431 ;  Exalted,  337 ;  Affiliated,  28 ;
Reinstated,  6;  Dimitted,  110;  Died,  34;  Rejected,  24;  Suspended,  13;  Ex-
pelled, 4.    Amount  of  dues,  $1885  90.
SUBORDINATE  CHAPTERS.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
1  San  Felipe  de  Austin,
2  Washington,
3  Jerusalem,
4  Trinity,
5  Brenham,
6  Lone  Star,
7  San  Jacinto,
8  Brazos,
9  Rising  Star,
10  Palestine,
11  Cherokee,
12  Ruthven,
14  Wheeloek,
15  Harmony,
18  Murchison,
19  Marshall,
21  Burleson,
22  Larissa,
24  Tyler,
25  Mount  Vernon,
27  St.  Andrew's,
29  Concord,
30  Zerubbabel,
32  Cyras,
33  Union,
36  John  Duncan,
37  Eagle,
38  Eureka,
39  H.  Yoakum,
41  Corsicana,
42  Fairfield,
43  Joshua,
44  Richmond,
46  Columbus,
47  Dallas,
48  La  Fayette,
49  Gilmer,
51  Gonzales,
52  Bonham,
53  Haggai,
54  Goliad,
Galveston.
Houston.
Anderson.
Crockett.
Brenham.
Austin.
Huntsville.
Washington.
San  Augustine.
Palestine.
Rusk.
Henderson.
Wheeloek.
Clark  sville.
La  Grange.
Marshall.
San  Antonio.
Larissa.
Tyler.
Shelbyville.
Lockhart.
Mount  Enterprise.
Leona.
Jefferson.
Montgomery.
Matagorda.
Elysian  Fields.
Cold  Springs.
Moscow.
Corsicana.
Fairfield.
Hallettsville.
Richmond.
Columbus.
Dallas.
Paris.
Gilmer.
Gonzales.
Bonham.
MoKinney.
Goliad.
27
1st  Tuesday.
1st  Monday.
3d  Saturday.
1st  Monday.
1st  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
2d  Monday.
2d  Wednesday.
1st  Friday.
3d  Monday.
1st  Thursday.
2d  Saturday.
2d  Friday.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Monday.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Monday  of  f.  m.
4th  Saturday.
1st  Thursday  af.  f.  m.
4th  Saturday.
3d  Thursday.
3d  Saturday.
1st  Wednesday.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Friday.
1st  Friday.
1st  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
Thursday  bef.  f.  m.
Saturday  bef.  f.  m.
1st  Monday.
Last  Monday.
3d  Saturday.
1st  Monday.
Wednesday  bef.  f.  m.
2d  Monday.
Friday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  Monday.
4th  Monday.
3d  Saturday.

--- Sayfa 424 ---
412
worlds'  masonic  register.
No.
Name.
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
55  Athens,
56  Keystone,
57  Mount  Horeb,
58  Fort  Worth,
59  Jasper,
60  St.  John's,
61  Joppa,
62  Sherman,
63  Tarrant,
65  Andrew  Neil,
66  Little  River,
67  Hempstead,
68  Decatur,
69  Kaufman,
70  Sabine  Pass,
71  Port  Sullivan,
72  Navidad,
73  Waxahachie,
74  Adoniram,
75  Veal's  Station,
76  Belton,
U.  D.  Columbia,
Athens.
Seguin.
Gabriel  Mills.
Fort  Worth.
Jasper.
Douglasville.
Wharton.
Sherman.
Tarrant.
Lexington.
Cameron.
Hempstead.
Decatur.
Kaufman.
Jefferson.
Port  Sullivan.
Texana.
Waxahachie.
Woodville.
Veal's  Station.
Belton.
Columbia.
2d  Monday.
1st  Monday.
4th  Saturday.
2d  Wednesday.
4th  Saturday.
Saturday  bef.  f.  m.
Last  Monday.
2d  Thursday.
Last  Thursday.
Friday  before  f.  m.
Saturday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  Monday.
Last  Friday.
1st  Friday.
1st  Saturday.
Thursday  bef.  f.  m.
1st  Tuesday.
1st  Saturday.
Last  Monday.
1st  Thursday.
4th  Saturday.
2d  Monday.
GRAND  COUNCIL.
The  Grand  Council  of  Texas  was  formed  June  25,  5856.  Its  Annual  Convo-
cations are  held  on  the  twenty-second  of  June.  It  has  21  subordinate  Coun-
cils under  its  jurisdiction.  The  last  returns  show  the  following:  Number  of
Members,  599;  Greeted,  71 ;  Affiliated,  5  ;  Dimitted,  25;  Suspended,  1;  Eeio-
stated,  1 ;  Died,  5.
SUBORDINATE   COUNCILS.
No.       Name.
Location.
No.         Name.
Location.
1  Houston,
Houston.
12  Huntsville,
Huntsville.
2  Austin,
Austin.
13  Geo.  M.  Patrick.
,  Tyler.
3  Coleman,
Marshall.
14  San  Antonio,
San  Antonio.
4  Rusk,
Rusk.
15  Larissa,
Larissa.
5  Tyrian,
Seguin.
16  Galveston,
Galveston.
6  Gonzales,
Gonzales.
17  Cannon,
San  Augustine.
7  Jerusalem,
Anderson.
18  Dallas,
Dallas.
8  Trinity,
Crockett.
19  Marysville,
Marysville.
9  Munger,
La  Grange.
20  Willis  Stewart,
Palestine.
10  James  Webb,
Henderson.
21  Colorado,
Columbus.
11  Lockhart,
Lockhart.

--- Sayfa 425 ---
TEXAS.  413
GRAND  COMMANDERY.
The  Grand  Commandery  of  Texas  was  organized  January  19,  1855.  Its
Annual  Conclaves  are  held  at  such  time  and  place  as  the  Grand  Chapter  of
Texas  designates  for  holding  its  Annual  Convocations.  This  Grand  Com-
mandery is  subordinate  to  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the  U.  S.  It  has  6  sub-
ordinates, the  returns  of  5  of  which  show  247  Members,  18  Created,  4  Died,  12
Dimitted.
SUBORDINATE  COMMANDERIES.
No.      Name.
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
1  San  Felipe  de  Austin,
Galveston.
2  Ruthven,
Houston.
2d  Friday.
3  Palestine,
Palestine.
3d  Monday.
4  Colorado,
Austin.
Last  Monday.
5  Barziza,
Wheelook.
2d  Monday.
6  Dallas,
Dallas.
3d  Thursday.
SUBSCRIBERS'  NAMES.
DECATUR.
Collins,  R.  M.,  Merchant.     Decatur,  186.
McKurarE'S".
Hacker,  Philip  S.,  Cabinet-maker.     St.  John's,  51.
PARKER  CITY.
Amos,  Joseph  S.,  Farmer.    Veal's  Station,  205.
Witt,  Preston,  Parmer  and  Stock  Raiser.     Ocean,  230.
"WE  ATHERFORD.
Baker,  E.  P.,  Parmer.     S.  W.,  Ocean,  230
Baum,  Elias,  Merchant.     St.  John's,  51.
Corning,  A.  F.,  Attorney  at  Law.     W.  M.,  Ocean,  230  ;  King,  Veal's  Station
chap.,  75.
Daniels,  Jr.,  B.  A.,  Merchant.    Ocean,  230.
Davenport,  C.  I.,  Parmer.     Ocean,  230 ;  Veal's  Station  chap.,  75.,
Iglehard,  D.  T.,  Physician.    J.  W.,  Ocean,  230  ;  Veal's  Station  chap.,  75.
Lewis,  T.  D.,  Merchant.     Ocean,  230.
Luckey,  N.  B.,  Merchant.     St.  John's,  53 ;  Tyler  chap.,  24.
Prince,  John  H.,  County  Clerk.    Sec,  Ocean,  230.
Eichey,  B.  L.,  Cabinet-maker.     Ocean,  230.
March  9, 1786,  His  Royal  Highness  Prince  William  Henry,  afterward  Duke
of  Clarence,  was  initiated  in  Lodge  No.  86,  at  Plymouth.

--- Sayfa 426 ---
414  world's  masonic  register.
INGRATITUDE.
If  we  come  to  consider  the  close  relation  existing  between  man  and  his  fellow-
beings,  we  can  hardly  conceive  it  possible  in  human  nature  not  to  recognize  and
acknowledge  benefits  received  at  the  hands  of  others.  Man  is  allied  to  his  fellow-
man  by  sympathy  and  affection,  which  continually  flow  from  the  Divine  Parent
in  streams  of  love  and  pure  benefaction.  Created  alike  in  His  image,  having,  a
common  heritage  and  an  ultimate  destiny,  it  would  seem  that  as  some  enjoy
advantages,  whether  fortuitous  or  by  design,  if  these  advantages  are  used
to  benefit  others,  that  the  God  within  us  and  our  own  nature  would  impel  a
proper  acknowledgment  and  a  due  sense  of  gratitude  for  such  benefits  received.
Yet  we  frequently  find  men  who  are  insensible  to  acts  of  kindness,  who  never
acknowledge  any  obligations  for  favors  done  them.  It  would  seem  impossible
for  such  phases  of  humanity  to  be  developed,  if  we  had  not  the  evidence  mani-
fested in  our  social  and  business  relations  with  our  fellow-men.  Ingratitude  is
not  so  much  a  crime  as  it  is  the  result  of  degenerate,  imbecile,  defective  organ-
ism. For  it  can  hardly  be  believed  that  any  man  impressed  with  the  divine
image,  was  so  deficient  in  those  faculties  of  perception  which  are  of  the  divine
nature,  as  not  to  realize  kindness,  sympathy,  and  good  acts  done  to  him  by  his
fellow-man.  Gratitude  is  an  acknowledgment  of  the  sense  we  have  of  the
obligation  for  favors  received.  Those  who  possess  not  that  divine  quality,  or
perception  of  a  sensibility  of  kindness,  or  favors  received  at  the  hands  of  man
cannot  possibly  be  sensible  of  the  obligations  due  to  God.  It  is  only  as  we
manifest  the  divine  nature  within  us  in  our  intercourse  with  our  fellow-man,
that  we  manifest  our  appreciation  of  the  attributes  of  the  Deity.  We  cannot  be
ungrateful  or  insensible  to  the  kindness  of  man,  and  be  grateful  to  the  Divine
Parent.  If  we  have  a  realizing  sense  of  our  obligations  to  God,  we  will  manifest
a  corresponding  sense  of  obligation  to  our  fellow-man.  Our  actions  and  conduct
toward  our  brother  man  is  the  only  criterion  whereby  man  can  judge  of  the
perceptions  he  has  of  the  attributes  and  perfections  of  Deity.  Notwithstand-
ing the  universal  detestation  and  abhorrence,  by  all  benevolent  and  generous
minds,  of  ingratitude,  yet,  perhaps,  there  is  no  imperfection  in  man  which  ought
to  call  forth  more  freely  the  genial  sympathies  than  this  defect  of  an  ungrateful
nature ;  because,  how  gloomy  and  void  of  all  that  contributes  to  the  real  happi-
ness of  man  must  that  soul  be  who  cannot  enjoy  the  gifts  of  the  Creator,  realize
the  beauties  of  nature,  or  the  divine  qualities  in  man,  nor  invoke  grateful  aspira-
tions to  God  for  the  great  boon  of  life  and  an  immortality  of  existence !  It  is  in
every  station  of  life  that  we  find  men  of  a  thankless  and  ungrateful  nature,
among  church  and  lay  men,  professors  and  non-professors  of  religion,  among
all  classes  and  conditions,  from  the  highest  to  the  lowest ;  and  as  man  cannot
conceal  the  prominent  traits  of  his  nature  from  those  with  whom  he  is  in  con-
stant association,  it  is  sufficient  for  us  to  remark  that  an  ungrateful  man  cannot
possibly  realize  or  appreciate  the  principles  of  our  Order,  and  as  such  cannot
participate  in  the  benefactions  of  the  institution,  much  less  in  those  kindly
sympathies  and  communion  of  soul  with  soul,  congenial  to  the  generous  and
good.   Such  ought  never  to  be  admitted  within  the  sacred  sanctuary  of  Masonry.

--- Sayfa 427 ---
VERMONT.
GRAND     LODGE.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  Vermont  was  organized  October  14th,  5794.  Its  regu-
lar Annual  Communications  are  held  on  the  second  Wednesdays  of  January,  at
such  place  as  it  from  time  to  time  appoints.  Its  membership  is  composed  of
the  Grand  Officers,  District  Deputy  Grand  Masters,  Past  Grand  Officers,  Past
Masters,  and  Masters  and  Wardens  of  Lodges.  The  revenue  of  the  Grand
Lodge  is  derived  from  the  following  sources  : —
For  Charters  for  new  Lodges
$25
For  every  Initiation
1
There  are  52  subordinate  Lodges  in  this  jurisdiction.    Total  number  of  actual
membership,  2754.     The  returns  at  the  Annual  Communication  in  January,
5860,  show  that  there  were  Rejected  during  the  year,  3  ;  Dimitted,  51 ;  Sus-
pended, 26 ;  Expelled,  3 ;  Died,  41.     Amount  of  dues  and  fees  received,  $1055.
The  present  officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  are  as  follows  : —
Philip  C.  Tucker,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
Gamaliel  Washburn,  R.  W.  Deputy  Grand  Master.
George  M.  Hall,  R.  W.  Senior  Grand  Warden.
Wm.  P.  Russell,  R.  W.  Junior  Grand  Warden.
Wm.  G.  Shaw,  R.  W.  Grand  Treasurer.
John  B.  Hoi.lenbeck,  R.  W.  Grand  Secretary.
Rauslure  W,  Clarke,  R.  W.  Senior  Grand  Deacon.
Nathan  P.  Bowman,  R.  W.  Junior  Grand  Deacon.
Appointed : —
Samuel  Willson,  W.  Grand  Lecturer.
Rev.  George  B.  Manser,  W.  Grand  Chaplain.
Rev.  Warren  Skinner,  W.  Assistant  Grand  Chaplain.
Isaac  B.  Bowdish,  W.  Grand  Marshal.
Sidney  M.  Southard,  W.  Grand  Sword  Bearer.
Henry  Carlisle,  W.  Grand  Pursuivant.
Lemuel  S.  Drew,      |
w  QnuA  stewarda.
Horatio  N.  Coon,    )
James  L.  Morton,  W.  Grand  Tyler.
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.
No.       Lodge.  Location.                          Time  of  Meeting.                   Master.
1  Dorchester,  Vergennes.  Thursday  bef.  f.  m.  Samuel  Willson.
2  Union,  Middlebury.  1st  Monday.  Ira  Gifford.
3  Washington,  Burlington.  1st  Wednesday.  Wm.  G.  Shaw.
(415)

--- Sayfa 428 ---
416
WORLD'S   MASONIC  REGISTER.
Location.  Time  of  Meeting.  Master.
St.  Alban's.  1st  Wednesday.  Wm.  M.  Beeman.
Brideport.  Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.    Wm.  F.  Benjamin.
Fairfax.  Wednesday  b.  f.  m.    S.  B.  Hunt.
Royalton.  Wednesday  b.  f.  m.    Richard  Smith.
Morristown.  Wednesday  b.  f.  m.   A.  J.  Blanchard.
East  Berkshire.  Monday  bef.  f.  m.      S.  S.  Butler.
Orwell.  Tuesday  bef.  f.  m.
Alburg.  1st  Monday.  Micajah  T.  Mott.
Richmond.  Tuesday  of  f.  m.         David  A.  Murray.
Bennington.  Tu.  on  or  b.  f.  m.       Calvin  Dart.
Swanton.  2d  Tuesday.  Geo.  M.  Hall.
Northfield.  Wednesday  of  f.  m.   E.  G.  Babcock.
Troy.  Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.       Jas.  A.  Kendall.
North  Hero.  4th  Thursday.  H.  Wadsworth.
Windsor.  Thursday  b.  f.  m.       C.  W.  Warren.
Craftsbury.  Wednesday  of  f.  m.    Wm.  Hidden.
Hartford.  Tu.  on  or  b.  f.  m.       James  Gifford.
Montpelier.  Monday  of  f.  m.         John  C.  Emery.
East  Townsend.  Thursday  b.  f.  m.      L.  C.  Howard.
Charlotte.  Tuesday  b.  f.  m.        L.  D.  Stone.
Brandon.  1st  Wednesday.  Ozro  Meacham.
Essex.  1st  Tuesday.  A.  Bellows.
St.  Johnsbury.  Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.       A.  P.  Blunt.
West  Randolph.  Tu.  of  or  b.  f.  m.        L.  D.  Fay.
Rochester.  Tuesday  b.  f.  m.         G.  L.  Chaffee.
Castleton.  Wednesday  b.  f.  m.    H.  F.  Smith.
Woodstock.  Wednesday  off.  m.    E.  Tracy.
Putney.  Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.    James  Keyes.
Hinesburgh.  Friday  before  f.  m.    Orrin  Murray.
Rutland.  1st  Thursday.  S.  D.  Jenness.
Barre.  Friday  of  or  b.  f.  m.
Brattleboro'.  Tu.  on  or  b.  f.  m.       W.  E.  Nichols.
West  Poultney.  Tuesday  b.  f.  m.         H.  Ruggles.
Wilmington.  Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.    K.  Haskins.
Sheldon.  Wed.  of  or  b.  f.  m.     H.  Carlisle.
Milton.  2d  Tuesday.  H.  L.  Hoxsie.
Springfield.  Tuesday  b.  f.  m.         H.  W.  Floyd.
Manchester.  Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.       H.  K.  Fowler.
Bradford.  Wednesday  of  f.  m.    I.  C.  Colby.
Island  Pond.  2d  Monday.  E.  H.  Fennessey.
Bellows  Falls.  Friday  on  or  b.  f.  m.  C.  E.  Newcomb.
S.  Londonderry  and  Jamaica   L.  H.  Sprague.
Bristol.    H.  Munsill.
North  Bennington   N.  B.  Loomis.
Waterbury.     H.  M.  Bruce.
Cambridge.  Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.       A.  R.  Kingsbury.
Chelsea.    Danl.  Wyman.
Wallingford.  2d  Wednesday.  F.  Button.
Proctorsville.    W.  Skinner.
4  Franklin,
5  Morning  Sun,
6  Lamville,
7  Rising  Sun,
8  Mount  Vernon,
9  Missisquoi,
10  Independence,
11  Columbus,
12  North  Star,
13  Mt.  Anthony,
14  Seventy-Six,
15  De  Witt  Clinton,
16  Masonic  Union,
17  Isle  of  Patmos,
18  Vermont,
20  Meridian  Sun,
21  United  Brethren,
22  Aurora,
23  Blazing  Star,
24  Friendship,
25  St.  Paul's,
26  McDonough,
27  Passumpsic,
28  Phoenix,
29  Rural,
30  Lee,
31  Woodstock,
32  Golden  Rule,
33  Patriot,
34  Centre,
35  Granite,
36  Columbian,
37  Morning  Star,
38  Social,
39  Haswell,
40  Seneca,
41  St.  John's,
42  Adoniram,
43  Charity,
44  Island  Pond,
45  King  Solomon,
46  Mount  Lebanon,
47  Libanus,
48  Tucker,
49  Winooski,
50  Warner,
51  Geo.  Washington
U.D.  White  Rock,
U.D.  La  Fayette,

--- Sayfa 429 ---
VERMONT.
417
GRAND  CHAPTER.
Formed  5806.    Keorganized  July  18th,  5849.
This  Grand  Chapter  holds  its  Annual  Convocations  on  the  second  Thursdays
in  August,  at  such  place  as  the  Grand  Chapter  determines.  It  has  13  subordi-
nate Chapters  under  its  jurisdiction,  which,  in  5859,  reported  731  members.
Amount  of  dues  paid  to  Grand  Chapter,  $332.  There  were  9  Deaths  and  11
Dimissions  during  the  year.
SUBORDINATE  CHAPTERS.
No.       Name.
1  Champlain,
2  Jerusalem,
3  Burlington,
4  La  Fayette,
6  Whitney,
6  Windsor,
7  King  Solomon,
8  Temple,
9  Farmers',
10  Poultney,
11  Haswell,
12  Fort  Dummer,
13  Mount  Lebanon,
Location.
St.  Alban's.
Vergennes  and  Middlebury.
Burlington.
East  Berkshire.
Royalton.
Hartland.
Montpelier.
Bennington.
Brandon  and  Rutland.
Poultney.
St.  Johnsbury.
Brattleboro'.
Bradford.
Timb  of  Meeting.
Third  Tuesday.
Third  Monday.
Second  Wednesday.
Monday  before  f.  m.
Thurs.  ou  or  b.  f.  m.
First  Monday.
Thursday  of  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Third  Wednesday.
Last  Thursday.
Th.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
Second  Thursday.
Wednesday  of  f.  m.
GRAND  COUNCIL.
Organized  5854.
This  Grand  Council  holds  its  Annual  Convocations  on  the  second  Fridays  of
August.  It  has  10  subordinate  Councils  under  its  jurisdiction,  which,  in
August,  5860,  returned  457  members.
SUBORDINATE  COUNCILS.
No.  Name.
1  Columbus,
2  Vergennes,
3  Bennington,
4  Montpelier,
5  Burlington,
6  Haswell,
7  La  Fayette,
8  Windsor,
9  Farmers,
10  Morning  Star,
Location.
St.  Alban's.
Vergennes  and  Middlebury.
Bennington  and  Manchester.
Montpelier.
Burlington.
Royalton.
East  Berkshire.
Hartland.
Brandon  and  Rutland.
W.  Poultney.
Time  of  Meeting.
Third  Tuesday.
Third  Monday.
Thursday  of  f.  m.
Second  Wednesday.
Thursday  b.  n.  m.
Monday  b.  f.  m.
First  Monday.
Third  Wednesday.
Last  Thursday.

--- Sayfa 430 ---
418  world's  masonic  register.
GRAND  COMMANDERY.
The  Grand  Commandery  of  Vermont  was  organized  in  1825,  became  dormant
during  the  anti-Masonic  persecution,  and  reorganized  January  14th,  1852.  It
has  4  subordinate  Commanderies  under  its  jurisdiction,  whose  united  membership,
at  the  Annual  Conclave  in  January,  1860,  was  185.     Sir  Knights  created,  13.
SUBORDINATE   COMMANDERIES.
No.  Name.  Location.  No.       Name.  Location.
1  Mount  Calvary,      Middlebury  and  Rutland.     3  La  Fayette,        East  Berkshire.
2  Burlington,  Burlington.  4  Vermont,  Windsor.
SUBSCRIBERS'  NAMES.
BELLOWS  FALLS,  "Windham  County.
Ball,  B.  G.,  Proprietor  Island  House.     Social  Friends,  42,  N.  H.
Fleming,  S.  C,  Railroad  Conductor.  S.  W.,  King  Solomon's,  45  ;  Franklin
chap.,  Mass.
Graves,  Geo.  A.,  Job  Printer.     J.  D.,  King  Solomon's,  45.
Guild,  Geo.  0.,  Dry  Goods  Merchant.     Secretary,  King  Solomon's,  45.
Newcomb,  C.  B.,  Merchant  Tailor.  W.  M.,  King  Solomon's,  45 ;  Windsor
chap.,  6.
Perkins,  J.  D.,  Watch-maker  and  Jeweler.    J.  W.,  King  Solomon's,  45.
Stone,  Wm.,  Builder.     Initiated  a.l.  5817,  King  Solomon's,  45.
BEAUT)  ON,  Butland  County.
Bliss,  B.  J.,  Merchant.  P.  M.,  St.  Paul's,  25 ;  Treasurer,  Farmers'  chap.,  9 ;
Treasurer,  Farmers'  coun.,  9.
Davenport,  Barzillai,  Attorney  at  Law  and  Town  Clerk.  Initiated  April,  a.l.
5818 ;  P.  M.,  St.  Paul's,  25  ;  H.  P.,  Farmers'  chap.,  9 ;  Thrice  111.  G.  M  ,
Farmers'  coun.,  9 ;  Grand  Com.,  Mount  Calvary  com.,  1 ;  P.  Deputy  G.  M.,
Grand  Lodge ;  Grand  H.  P.,  Grand  Chap. ;  P.  Eminent  G.  C,  Vermont.
Forbes,  Robt.,  Book-keeper.     Chaplain,  St.  Paul's,  25.
Hunt,  H.  A.,  Wagon  and  Carriage  Manufacturer.  J.  W.,  St.  Paul's,  25 ;
P.  P.  S.,  Farmers'  chap.,  9 ;  Farmers'  coun.,  9.
Kingsley,  N.  P.,  Watches,  Clocks,  Fancy  Goods,  Cabinet  Ware,  etc.  Secre-
tary, St.  Paul's,  25.
Roberts,  Hiram,  Operative  Mason  and  Constable.  S.  W.,  St.  Paul's,  25 ;
G.  M.  1st  Veil,  Farmers'  chap.,  9 ;  Farmers'  coun.,  9 ;  Mount  Calvary  com.,  1.
BBATTLEBOBO',  Windham  County.
Bartleff,  F.  B.,  Carriage-maker.     Columbian,  36.
Burrows,  J.  F.,  Agriculturalist.  Columbian,  36;  P.  King,  Fort  Dunimer
chap.,  12.

--- Sayfa 431 ---
VERMONT.  419
Carpenter,  E.  J.,  Periodicals,  Books,  and  Fancy  Goods.  P.  M.,  Columbian,
36 ;  G.  M.  3d  Veil,  Port  Dummer  chap.,  12.
Clark,  George  W.     Columbian,  36;  Port  Dummer  chap.,  12.
Denison,  C.  H.,  Carriage-maker.     Columbian,  36.
Eason,  Warren  E.,  Dealer  in  Flour,  Meal,  and  Feed.  Columbian,  36  ;  Treas.,
Fort  Dummer  chap.,  12.
Harris,  B.  D.,  State  Senator.     Columbian,  36.
Harris,  Frank  W.,  Builder.     Columbian,  36.
Marsh,  Jacob.,  Rule  Manufacturer.     Columbian,  36.
Newman,  Geo.  H.,  Founder  and  Machinist.  S.  W.,  Columbian,  36  ;  King,
Fort  Dummer  chap.,  12.
Nichols,  Wm.  E.,  Carriage  Manufacturer.  W.  M.,  Columbian,  36 ;  Fort
Dummer  chap.,  12.
Perry,  Wm.  C,  Proprietor  Brattleboro'  House.  Columbian,  36 ;  Secretary,
Fort  Dummer  chap.,  12.
Simonds,  Charles  F.     Columbian,  36 ;  Fort  Dummer  chap.,  12.
Vinton,  J.  F.,  Machinist.     Columbian,  36.
Vinton,  Wm.  H.,  Paper  Manufacturer.     Columbian,  36.
Waite,  S.  M.,  Bank  Cashier.  S.  D.,  Columbian,  36 ;  0.  H.,  Fort  Dummer
chap.,  12.
Wales,  T.  D.,  Carriage-ironer.     Columbian,  36.
BTJELIN'GTOM',  Crittenden  County.
Allen,  N.,  Hats,  Caps,  Furs,  Trunks,  Gloves,  etc.  Washington,  3 ;  Burling-
ton chap.,  3.
Ballou  &  Van  Namee,  Candy  and  Cigar  Manufacturers.     Washington,  3.
Bigelow,  Geo.  H.  Secretary,  Washington,  3 ;  Secretary,  Burlington  chap.,
3 ;  R.,  Burlington  coun.,  5.
Brinsmaid,  Wm.,  Watch-maker  and  Jeweler.    Washington,  3.
Brown,  Samuel  S.,  Crockery,  China,  Glass  Ware,  Paper  Hangings,  etc.
P.  Treasurer,  Washington,  3 ;  P.  Treasurer,  Burlington  chap.,  3 ;  Treasurer,
Burlington  coun.,  5 ;  Treasurer,  Burlington  com.,  2  ;  Grand  Treasurer,  Grand
Com.,  Vermont.
Carpenter,  Benj.  W.,  Physician  ftnd  Surgeon.     Washington,  3.
Curtis,  M.  B.,  Proprietor  Lake  House.     Washington,  3.
Downer,  P.  R.,  Conductor  R.  and  B.  Railroad.  Washington,  3  ;  Burlington
chap.,  3.
Drew,  Lemuel  S.,  Proprietor  American  Hotel.  Washington,  3  ;  Burlington
chap.,  3  ;  Burlington  coun.,  5  ;  Burlington  com.,  2.
Hollenbeck,  John  B.,  Collector  of  Customs  and  Attorney  at  Law.  Grand
Secretary,  Grand  Lodge;  Grand  Secretary,  Grand  Chap.;  Grand  Recorder,
Grand  Coun. ;  Grand  Recorder,  Grand  Com.,  Vermont ;  Order  of  High  Priest-
hood.
Nelson,  Chas.  L.,  Chair  and  Furniture  Dealer.     Washington,  3.
Roby,  Joseph  W.,  Apothecary  and  Druggist.  Washington,  3 ;  Burlington
chap.,  3.
Styles,  Geo.  W.,  Cigar  Manufacturer.     Washington,  3.

--- Sayfa 432 ---
420  world's  masonic  register.
Turk,  Bennett,  Clothing  Merchant.  Washington,  3;  G.  M.  of  2d  Veil,  Bur
lington  chap.,  3 ;  Burlington  coun.,  5  ;  Burlington  com.,  2.
Walker,  0.  J.,  Wholesale  Grocer.     Washington,  3.
Woodhouse,  Chas.  W.,  Assistant  Cashier  of  Merchants'  Bank.  S.  W.,  Wash-
ington, 3 ;  B.  A.  C,  Burlington  chap.,  3 ;  Burlington  conn.,  5.
MIDDLEBTJKY,  Addison  County.
Buttolph,  David  N.,  Agriculturalist.     Union,  2.
Clay,  B.  R.,  Millinery  and  Ladies'  Furnishing  Goods.     Union,  2.
Copeland,  A.  H.,  Bookseller  and  Stationer.  Union,  2  ;  Jerusalem  chap.,  2  ;
Vergennes  coun.,  2.
Daley,  Peter  T.,  Tailor  and  Merchant.     Libanus,  47.
Dickinson,  O.  S.,  Jeweler.     Union,  2.
Earl,  C.  D.,  Hardware  Salesman.     J.  D.,  Union,  2.
Harris,  Nathaniel,  M.D.  and  Dentist.  P.  S.  W.,  Union,  2  ;  Jerusalem  chap.,
2  ;  Vergennes  coun.,  2.
Holton,  Simeon,  Watch-maker.  S.  W.,  Union,'2;  P.  S.,  Jerusalem  chap.,  2  ;
Vergennes  coun.,  2.
Hosmer,  E.  M.,  Flour  Manufacturer.     Union,  2.
Morton,  Cyrus,  Architect  and  Builder.  Initiated  a.l.  5823 ;  P.  J.  and  S.  W.,
and  Treasurer,  Union,  2  ;  Mark  Master  Mason.
Pitts,  H.  W.,  Cotton  Manufacturer.     Union,  2.
Wright,  E.  B.,  Attorney,  Notary  Public,  and  Justice  of  the  Peace.     Union,  2.
PTTTNET,  Windham  County.
Baley,  Jerome,  Paper  Manufacturer.     Golden  Bule,  32.
Houghton,  S.  W.,  Blacksmith.     S.  D.,  Golden  Bule,  32.
Keyes,  James,  Woolen  Manufacturer.  W.  M.,  Golden  Rule,  32  ;  initiated
a.l.  5817  ;  Lebanon  Forest  chap.
Ryan,  Jeremiah,  Farmer  and  Butcher.  Initiated  a.l.  April,  5818 ;  P.  M.,
Golden  Rule,  32.
KTJTLAH'D,  Butland  County.
Bagley,  James  M.,  Superintendent's  Clerk  R.  and  B.  Railroad  and  Ticket
Master  Rutland  Station.  Centre,  34 ;  Burlington  chap.,  3  ;  Farmers'  coun.,  9;
Mount  Calvary  com.,  1.
Crampton,  John  W.,  Stoves,  Tin,  etc.    J.  W.,  Centre,  34.
Dibble,  Moses,  Clothing  Manufacturer.     Centre,  34.
Gordon,  John  W.,  Saddle  and  Harness.     Centre,  34.
Howard,  A.  R.,  Surgeon  Dentist.     Centre,  34.
Kingsley,  Chester,  Dealer  in  Groceries  and  Provisions.     Sec'y,  Centre,  34.
Kingsley,  L.  G.,  Hardware,  Furniture,  Grain,  etc.     Centre,  34.
Pettis,  Wm.  H.,  Baker.     Centre,  34.
Pond,  E.  A.,  M.D.  P.  M.,  Centre,  34;  P.  King,  Farmers'  chap.,  9 ;  Deputy
Thrice  111.  G.  M.,  Farmers'  coun.,  9  ;  S.  W.,  Mount  Calvary  com.,  1 ;  Assistant
Grand  Lecturer;  Dist.  Deputy  G.  M.  4th  District.
Richardson,  M.  S.,  Coppersmith  and  Brass  Founder.  Centre,  34 ;  Farmers'
chap.,  9 ;  Farmers'  coun.,  9 ;  C.  G.,  Mount  Calvary  com.,  1.

--- Sayfa 433 ---
VERMONT.  42  L
Whitney,  Elijah,  Machinist.    Centre,  34.
Williams,  Samuel,  Attorney  at  Law  and  Notary  Public.  P.  S  "W.,  Centre,
34 ;  Farmers'  chap.,  9 ;  Farmers'  coun.,  9 ;  Mount  Calvary  com.,  1
Woods,  N.  A.,  Pattern  maker.  Centre,  34 ;  Farmers'  chap.,  9'-  E.  and  S.
Master.
ST.  ALBAN'S,  Franklin  County.
Barnard,  J.  J.,  Proprietor  Tremont  House.    Washington,  3.
Beeman,  Wm.  M.,  Jeweler.  W.  M.,  Franklin,  4 ;  P.  P.  S.,  Champlain  chap.,
1 ;  Columbus  coun.,  1.
Bridges,  Judge  Wm.,  Justice  of  the  Peace,  Town  Clerk,  and  Insurance
Agent.  Initiated  previous  to  5826  ;  P.  M.,  Franklin,  4;  Secretary,  Champlain
chap.,  1 ;  Recorder,  Columbus  coun.,  1.
Campbell,  Thomas  H.,  retired  from  business.  Initiated  a.l.  5821 ;  P.  M.,
Franklin,  4;  P.  H.  P.,  Champlain  chap.,  1 ;  Deputy  Thrice  111.  G.  M.,  Colum-
bus coun.,  1 ;  Burlington  com.,  2.
Greene,  Heman,  Civil  Engineer  and  Farmer.  Initiated  a.l.  5824;  P.  M.,
Franklin,  4;  P.  H.  P.,  Champlain  chap.,  1 ;  Thrice  HI.  G.  M.,  Columbus  coun.,
1 ;  Burlington  com.,  2  ;  P.  Dist.  Deputy  G.  M.
Hutchins,  A.  B.,  Hotel  Clerk.     Franklin,  4.
McGowen,  Wm.  B.,  Surgeon  and  Dentist.     Secretary,  St.  Alban's,  4.
Peirce,  Charles  M.,  Mercantile  Salesman.     S.  D.,  Franklin,  4.
Stannard,  Geo.  J.,  Founder  and  Machinist.    Franklin,  4.
TEBGENIfES,  Addison  County.
Chapman,  Rodman,  Farmer  and  Produce  Dealer.  W.  M.,  Dorchester,  1 ;
Jerusalem  chap.,  2  ;  Vergennes  coun.,  2  ;  initiated  Feb.  a.l.  5818.
Curtiss,  Charles  E.,  Plain  and  Ornamental  Painter,  and  Dealer  in  Paints,  Oils,
etc.     Secretary,  Dorchester,  1 ;  Jerusalem  chap.,  2  ;  Vergennes  coun.,  2.
Mason,  Andrew,  Agriculturalist.     Libanus,  47.
Maxfleld,  Paschal,  Physician  and  Surgeon.  P.  M.,  Dorchester,  1 ;  Jerusalem
chap.,  2.
Tucker,  Philip  O,  Attorney  at  Law  and  Postmaster.  Initiated  Nov.  8th,
a.l.  5821 ;  Deputy  Grand  Master  Vermont  17  years  in  succession,  and  Grand
Master  for  the  past  14  years ;  3  years  Grand  H.  P.,  Grand  Chap. ;  P.  Grand  G.,
Grand  Com. ;  Past  D.  G.  H.  P.,  State  of  Vermont.
Willson,  Samuel,  retired  from  business.  Initiated  a.l.  5815  in  Faithful,
Charlestown,  N.  H. ;  elected  W.  M.,  Dorchester,  1,  a.l.  5820 ;  H.  P.  Jerusalem
chap.,  2 ;  P.  Thrice  HI.  G.  M.,  Vergennes  coun.,  2 ;  Grand  Lecturer,  Grand
Chap. ;  G.  King,  Grand  Chap..,  Vermont.
Young,  Benj.  F.,  Architect  and  Builder.  P.  S.  W.,  Dorchester,  1 ;  Treasurer,
Jerusalem  chap.,  2 ;  Vergennes  coun.,  2.
"WIBTDMILIj  POINT,  Grand  Isle  County.
Mott,  Danford,  retired  from  business.  Initiated  a.l.  5821 ;  P.  M.,  Columbus,
11 ;  Royal  Arch  Mason.

--- Sayfa 434 ---
422  world's  masonic  register.
ORIGIN  OF  THE  GRIDIRON  IN  MAKING  FREEMASONS.
In  years  gone  by,  say  forty  or  more,  there  lived  in  the  City  of  Gotham,  a
jolly  good  host  whose  physical  man  betokened  that  he  was  no  idle  workman  at
seasons  of  refreshment,  and  his  full  face  denoted  that  good  humor  and  a  relish
for  jokes  whetted  his  appetite  for  bibibles  as  well  as  eatables.  This  jolly  good
host  was  a  Freemason,  and  his  hotel  was  a  resort  for  the  members  of  the  Craft
to  while  away  their  leisure  time,  where  they  were  received  with  a  smiling  welcome,
and  their  indulgences  seasoned  with  a  happy  jest  or  some  lively  anecdote.
Among  the  members  of  the  Lodge  to  which  our  good  host  was  attached  was
one,  a  tailor  by  profession,  who  fully  equaled  him  in  pranks  and  jokes,  and
when  these  two  met  some  mischief  was  sure  to  be  concocted,  some  plan  devised
for  merriment  at  some  other's  expense.  Among  the  inmates  of  the  hotel  was
a  very  worthy  young  man,  a  mechanic,  employed  in  the  neighborhood,  boarding
there  for  convenience.  This  young  man  had  a  desire  to  learn  the  mysteries  of
Freemasonry,  and  requested  the  landlord  to  advise  him  the  course  to  pursue,  to
which  he  readily  agreed,  as  the  young  man  was  every  way  worthy  to  become  a
member  of  the  fraternity.  The  application  was  made,  and  everything  was
satisfactory.  Prior  to  his  initiation,  he  concluded  to  make  his  debut  in  the
Lodge  in  a  new  outfit,  and  he  engaged  a  new  suit  from  our  jolly  good  tailor,  to
be  finished  on  the  night  of  his  initiation.  The  tailor  being  cognizant  of  his
customer's  application  to  be  made  a  Mason,  and  divining  the  purpose  for  which
the  suit  of  clothes  was  ordered,  he,  at  the  suggestion  of  the  host,  devised  a  plan
for  some  sport  on  the  occasion.  The  worthy  host's  wife  it  was  known  had
some  curious  views  concerning  the  Mystic  Order,  and  believed  it  was  not
altogether  for  beneficial  or  charitable  purposes  the  Masons  met  in  their  Lodges.
The  tailor  prepared  a  piece  of  cloth,  and  scorched  it  in  stripes  as  if  it  had  been
burnt  on  a  gridiron ;  this  he  neatly  basted  on  the  seat  of  .the  pantaloons.  The
clothes  arrived  in  due  time,  and  soon  incased  the  physical  man  of  the  candidate
for  initiation.  He  presented  himself  before  the  host  before  going  to  the  Lodge,
who,  in  the  presence  of  his  better  half,  appearing  to  admire  very  much  the  new
suit,  and  inspecting  the  lower  part  of  his  coat,  he  remarked,  "How  very  con-
siderate !"  loud  enough  for  his  spouse  to  hear,  and  then  left  the  house  accom-
panied by  the  candidate.  The  next  day  the  clothing  was  closely  examined,  and
before  the  close  of  the  week,  there  were  few  of  the  lady  acquaintances,  whose
husbands  were  known  to  be  Masons,  who  did  not  see  those  pantaloons.  It  must
not  be  supposed  there  were  no  secret  conversations  in  relation  to  making
Masons  after  retiring  at  night,  between  the  good  host  and  his  better  half.  She,
good  soul,  serious  and  moralizing.  He  unable  to  contain  his  laughter,  and
striving  to  prevent  giving  offense.  The  circumstance  gave  occasion  for  much
talk  among  the  good  wives  in  the  neighborhood.  In  due  time  the  piece  of  cloth
which  had  created  no  little  excitement  was  removed,  and  the  young  man
remained  in  ignorance  of  the  practical  joke ;  the  subject  being  of  a  delicate
nature,  could  not  be  communicated  to  him  by  those  who  believed  him  to  have
been  a  victim  to  some  cruel  ceremony.  It  was  this  circumstance  which  gave
such  extensive  currency  to  the  belief  that  a  heated  gridiron  was  a  necessary
implement  in  Masonic  initiation.

--- Sayfa 435 ---
VIRGINIA.
GRAND    LODGE.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  Virginia  was  organized  October  13th,  5778.  Its  Annual
Communications  are  held  in  the  City  of  Richmond,  commencing  the  second
Monday  in  December.
The  Grand  Lodge  consists  of  the  Grand  Officers,  Past  Grand  and  Deputy
Grand  Masters,  and  Past  Grand  "Wardens,  Past  Masters,  and  Masters  and
Wardens  of  its  constituent  Lodges.
The  revenue  of  the  Grand  Lodge  is  derived  from  the  following  sources  : —
For  Charters  for  Lodges    $33  33^
For  Grand  Lodge  dues  for  each  Member  ...  25
(Provided  no  Lodge  pays  less  than  $5.)
For  Grand  Lodge  Diplomas    2  00
For  Degrees  conferred  in  Grand  Lodge     ...  16  67
The  published  transactions  of  the  Annual  Communication  of  this  Grand
Lodge  of  December  5859,  show  that  there  were  171  Chartered  Lodges ;  149  of
which  only  made  returns.  These  Lodges  returned  6167  Members.  There  were
70  Deaths,  86  Suspended,  and  17  Expelled  during  the  year.  The  amount  of
Grand  Lodge  dues  paid  was  $1564.
The  Officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  for  the  present  Masonic  year  are  : —
John  Robin  McDaniel,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
Lewis  B.  Williams,  R.  W.  Deputy  Grand  Master.
William  H.  Haeman,  R.  W.  Senior  Grand  Warden.
Leopold  C.  P.  Cowper,  R.  W.  Junior  Grand  Warden.
Thomas  U.  Dudley,  W.  Grand  Treasurer.
John  Dove,  W.  Grand  Secretary.
Edward  H.  Lane,  W.  Senior  Grand  Deacon.
William  Terry,  W.  Junior  Grand  Deacon.
F.  J.  Bogus,  W.  Grand  Chaplain.
John  Lester,  W.  Grand  Pursuivant.
Emanuel  Semon,  W.  Grand  Steward.
Richard  D.  Sanxay,  W.  Grand  Tyler.
William  B.  Isaacs,  W.  Deputy  Grand  Secretary.
(423)

--- Sayfa 436 ---
424
world's  masonic  register.
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.
No.
LODOB.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
1  Norfolk,  Norfolk.
2  Atlantic,  Norfolk.
2  Kilwinning  Cross,  Port  Royal.
3  Blandford,  Petersburg.
4  Fredericksburg,   Fredericksburg.
5  St.  Tammany,       Hampton.
6  Williamsburg,
7  BlueEidge,
7  Botetourt,
8  Roanoke,
9  Fairmount,
10  Richmond,
12  Monroe,
13  Staunton,
14  Manchester,
15  Petersburg,
16  Brooklyn,
Williamsburg.
Blue  Ridge.
Gloucester  C.  H.
Chester  Springs.
Fairmount.
Richmond.
Union.
Staunton.
Manchester.
Petersburg.
Brooklyn.
17  Chestnut  Grove,  Whitmell.
18  Smithfield  Union,  Smithfield.
19  Rich.  Randolph,  Richmond.
20  Franklin,  Buckhannon.
21  Hiram,  Winchester.
22  AlexandriaWash.  Alexandria.
23  Taylor,  Salem.
24  Pittsylvania,         Chatham.
25  Mount  Olivet,       Carsville.
26  Weston,  Weston.
27  Rock'ham  Union,  Harrisonburg.
28  Bigelow,  Philippi.
29  St.  Andrew's,       City  Point.
30  Suffolk,
31  Marion,
32  George,
33  Warren,
35  Catlett,
36  St.  John's,
Suffolk.
Marion.
Howardsville.
Pedlar  Mills.
Estillville.
Richmond.
37  Marshall  Union,   Moundsville.
38  Central,  New  Market.
39  Marshall,
41  Farmville,
42  Berlin,
43  Fairfax,
44  Prudence,
45  Scottsville,
46  Worth.  Smith,
47  Preston,
Lynchburg.
Farmville.
Berlin.
Culpeper  C.  H.
Bell's  Mill,  O.Brid
Scottsville.
Mount  Solon.
Jonesville.
1st  Thursday.
1st  Saturday.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
2d  Tuesday.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
4th  Monday.
2d  Monday.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Thursday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
1st  Tuesday.
3d  Monday.
2d  &  last  Fridays.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
2d  Monday.
Sat.  bef.  2d  Sunday.
4th  Saturday.
3d  Monday.
3d  Tuesday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
2d  &  4th  Thursdays.
3d  Monday.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Monday.
3d  Wednesday.
4th  Monday.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Sat.  af.  3d  Mon.
2d  Tu.  af.  1st  Mon.
2d  Tuesday.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Monday.
1st  Saturday.
Th.  af.  3d  Monday.
1st  Saturday.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
s.  2d  Saturday.
1st  Friday.
2d  Saturday.
3d  Monday.
J.  R.  Whiting.
W.  C.  Marrow.
Randolph  Peyton.
J.  A.  Barker.
Jas.  Hayes.
Wm.  E.  Wood.
Jones  Heller.
Robt.  Deatherage.
Rev.  Wm.  E.  Wiatt.
Wm.  H.  Easley.
Chas.  G.  Taylor.
Wm.  L.  Maule.
M.  P.  Diddle.
Wm.  H.  Harman.
Wm.  L.  Holt.
Robt.  Thorburne.
Wm.  Easley.
Wyatt  Walker.
G.  R.  Atkinson.
Wm.  T.  Allen.
Josiah  Bigelow.
Benj.  Miller.
John  A.  Milburn.
D.  C.  Shanks.
Wm.  B.  McGilvray.
Jas.  M.  McClenny.
Josiah  Bigelow.
Philo  Bradley.
N.  H.  Taft.
E.  B.  Britt.
Jas.  H.  Gilmore.
J.  W.  Elsom.
J.  Dudley  Davis.
C.  C.  Fugate.
Joseph  Hall.
Wm.  0.  Powell.
John  R.  McDaniel.
Richard  A.  Booker.
Saml.  B.  Kello.
G.  D.  Gray.
Saml.  G.  Clayton.
Wm.  M.  Wade.
John  M.  Conk.

--- Sayfa 437 ---
VIRGINTA.
425
LODOE.
Time  op  Meeting!.  •
Mastee.
48  Abingdon,
49  Greenbrier,
50  Piedmont,
51  Dove,
52  Brunswick,
53  Francaise,
54  Excelsior,
55  Palmyra,
56  Minerva,
57
58  Day,
59  Warren,
60  Widow's  Son,
61  Polk,
62  Tazewell,
63  Fredericksburg,
64  Natural  Bridge,
65  Jefferson,
66  Friendship,
67  Mountain  City,
68  Powhatan,
69  Mackjey,
70  Boonsborough,
71  Blue  Ridge,
72  James  Evans,
73  Clinton,
74  Fayetteville,
75  Rocky  Mount,
76  Montross,
77  Chuckatuck,
78  Washington,
79  Green  Spring,
80  Malta,
81  Salem,
82  WythevilleFrat.
83  Flat  Rock,
84  Acacia,
85  Astraea,
86  McDaniel,
87  Vincent  Witcher,
88  Lancaster,
89  Black  Heath,
91  Mount  Nebo,
92  Fleetwood  Har'y,
93  MorgantownU'n,
94  Greenway  Court,
95  Liberty,
96  Halifax  Hiram,
97  Frankford,
Abingdon.
Lewisburg.
Standardsville.
Richmond.
Lawrenceville.
Richmond.
Mill  Creek.
Columbia.
Cabell  Court  House.
Louisa  Court  House.
Cbristiansville.
Charlottesville.
Riceville.
Jeffersonville.
Fredericksburg.
Rockbridge  co.
Surry  Court  House.
Fincastle.
Lexington.
Powhatan  C.  House.
Campbell  C.  House.
Bedford  co.
White  Hall.
Buchanan.
Amhurst  C.  House.
Fayetteville.
Rock  Mount.
Montross.
Chuckatuck.
Washington.
Poindexter's  Store.
Charlestown.
Middleburg.
Wytheville.
Lunenburg  C.  H.
Jerusalem.
Sussex  C.  H.
Christiansburg.
Callendo.
Lancaster  C.  H.
Buck  Hill.
Shepherdstown.
Providence.
Morgantown.
White  Post.
Liberty.
Halifax  C.  H.
Frankford.
4th  Mon.  in  every  m.  Thos.  W.  Greenway.
4th  Monday.  J.  H.  D.  Johnson.
Friday  b.  f.  m.  Isaao  B.  Davis.
4th  Friday.  S.  B.  Jacobs.
2d  Saturday.  W.  E.  Brodnax.
2d  Fri.  in  every  mo.  Chas.  E.  Snodgrass.
Saturday  af.  f.  m.      John  Bell.
2d  Saturday.  Wm.  C.  Kean.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.       J.  K.  Salmon.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
Sat.  on 'or  b.  f.  m.
3d  Saturday.
Tues.  af.  last  Mon.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
Sat.  af.  1st  Monday.
2d  Saturday.
2d  Monday.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
2d  Saturday.
2d  Monday.
1st  Saturday.
Friday  b.  f.  m.
3d  Saturday.
3d  Monday.
Th.  af.  2d  Tuesday.
1st  Monday.
Th.  af.  2d  Monday.
4th  Saturday.
Evening  of  full  m.
Friday  af.  f.  m.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
3d  Friday.
Alt.  Mon.  &  Tues.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
4th  Saturday.
2d  Saturday.
3d  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
Th.  af.  3d  Monday.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
3d  Saturday.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
Friday  on  or  b.  f.  m.
4th  Monday.
4th  Monday.
1st  Thursday.
D.  M.  Hunter.
J.  L.  Cochran.
Jed.  Carter.
Hugh  S.  Doggett.
Joseph  Gilmore.
Jacob  Faulcon.
Schuyler  W.  Smith.
Wm.  McLaughlin.
Willis  J.  Dance.
Edwin  R.  Page.
G.  B.  Brown.
H.  C.  Snyder.
T.  W.  Dillard.
John  Goodridge.
C.  C.  Phillips.
J.  Conway  Brown.
Wm.  W.  Hanson.
Jos.  A.  Pugh.
Wm.  S.  Thornton.
Thos.  J.  Hendry.
A.  H.  Moorman.
Warner  Eubank.
John  H.  Hight.
J.  M.  Mickell.
J.  F.  Fauntleroy.
Jas.  F.  Johnson.
John  B.  Carrington.
D.  V.  Ott.

--- Sayfa 438 ---
426
world's  masonic  register.
No.
Lodge.
Time  op  Meeting.
Master.
98  Herman,
99  Somerton,
100  Ports'th  Naval,
101  Ohio,
103  New  Hope,
104  Kanawha,
106  Giles,
107  Monroe,
108  Wellsburg,
109  Door  to  Virtue,
110  Western  Star,
111  Charity,
112  Laurel,
113  Mount  Olivet,
114  Olive  Branch,
115  Prince  George,
116  Princeton,
117  Triluminar,
118  Washing.Union,
119  Meek.  Meridian,
120  And.  Jackson,
121  Ashton,
122  Roman  Eagle,
123  Blue  Stone  Un.,
124  Avon,
126  Linn  Banks,
127  Washington,
128  Wheeling,
129  Independence,
130  Henrico  Union,
131  Leitch,
132  Dallas,
133  Mount  Carmel,
134  Mayfield,
135  Hunter,
136  Equality,
137  Lafayette,
138  Indep't.  Orange,
139  Clinton,
140  Patrick  Henry,
141  De  Witt  Clinton,
142  Cassia,
143  Bucking.  Union,
144  St.  John's,
146  Doric,
148  Chandler,
149  Harmony,
150  Widow's  Son,
151  Franklin,
H.
Clarksburg.
Somerton.
Portsmouth.
Wheeling.
Piedmont.
Charleston.
Pearisburg.
Appomattox  C,
Wellsburg.
Newcastle.
Guyandotte.
Harper's  Ferry.
Red  House.
Parkersburg.
Leesburg.
Prince  George  C.  H.
Princeton.
Middleway.
Clarksville.
Mecklenburg  Co.
Alexandria.
Ravenswood.
Danville.
Mecklenburg  Co.
Summit  Point.
Madison  C.  H.
Martinsville.
Wheeling.
Independence.
Church  Hill.
Jacksonville.
Brucetown.
Warrenton.
Mayfield.
Edinburgh.
Martinsburg.
Luray.
Orange  C.  H.
Romney.
Patrick  County.
Carters  ville.
Woodstock.
Maysville.
Charlotte.
Cumberland  C.  H.
Perryville.
Nansemond  County.
Hicksford.
Franklin  Depot.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
3d  Saturday.
1st  Monday.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Monday  b.  f.  m.
2d  Monday.
Sat.  bef.  4th  Sun.
Last  Monday.
4th  Monday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Fri.  ev.  b.  1st  Sat.
3d  Monday.
1st  Monday.
4th  Saturday.
1st  Th.  a.  1st.  Mon.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
3d  Saturday.
Sat.  b.  3d  Monday.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
3d  Saturday.
Sat.  b.  f.  m.  at  3  p.m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
4th  Thursday.
2d  Monday.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
4th  Monday.
Friday  before  f.  m.
1st  Thursday.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Saturday.
2d  Monday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Wednesday.
Sat.  on  or  af.  f.  m.
1st  Saturday.
1st  Mon.  T>.  2d  Tu.
Tu.  af.  2d  Monday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
2d  Saturday.
Thurs.  of  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  Saturday.
1st  Monday  evening.
4lh  Saturday.
Chas.  Lewis.
Fred.  W.  Hunter.
C.  A.  Grice.
D.  E.  Donel.
Geo.  S.  Patton.
H.  W.  Broderick.
J.  D.  L.  F.  Patterson.
N.  W.  White.
C.  G.  Hill.
John  S.  Everett.
Wm.  E.  Smith.
J.  C.  Nash.
N.  Fenn.
Jas.  S.  Grigsby.
G.  M.  De  L.  Smith.
J.  H.  D.  Smoot.
B.  H.  Hoyt.,
Geo.  W.  Dame.
C.  H.  Pettus.
W.  G.  Hardesty.
Nelson  W.  Crisler.
G.  W.  Booker.
W.  J.  Bates.
Hasting  Fulton.
Alfred  S.  Lee.
F.  A.  Winstons.
Wm.  W.  Tanquary.
ZephaniahTurner.Jr.
Geo.  H.  Jordan.
D.  W.  Prescott.
Alex.  Newcomer.
Rev.  J.  W.  Watson.
Lewis  B.  Williams.
John  Kern,  Jr.
Jas.  P.  Critz.
M.  B.  Carrington.
John  Haas.
W.  W.  Forbes.
Jas.  J.  Word.
S.  J.  C.  Moor.
John  T.  Kilby.
J.  R.  Chambliss,  Jr.
Jos.  E.  Gillette.

--- Sayfa 439 ---
VIRGINIA.
427
No.       Lome.
Time  op  Meeting.
152  Fitzwhylsonn,
153  Dan  River,
154  Keysville,
155  Staunton  River,
156  Hunters,
157  Prospect  Hill,
158  Mannington,
160  Ripley,
161  Chesterfield,
162  Shelby,
163  Friendship,
164  Temperance,
165  Henry  Clay,
166  Mount  Vernon,
167  Preston,
168  Ashland,
169  Relief,
170  Fetterman,
171  Covington,
172  Minturn,
173  Hope,
174  N.  Cumberland
175  Mount  Olive,
176  Bethany,
177  Virginia,
178  KanawhaValley.
179  Wakoma,
180  Cameron,
182  Wayne,
183  Hill  City,
184  Capitol,
185  McAllister,
XT.  D.  Rye  Cove,
U.  D.  Martin's  St'n,
U.  D.  Patmos,
U.  D.  Metropolitan,
U.  D.  South  Side,
U.  D.  Moorefield,
Boydton.  Sat.  af.  3d  Monday.  J.  W.  Williamson.
Hyco  Falls  Academy. 1st  Saturday.
Keysville.  Fri.  af.  f.  m.  at  10a.m.  C.  H.  Henderson.
Brookneal.  Fri.  b.  3d  Saturday.  Chas.  Walker.
Blacksburg.  Tu.  af.  1st  &  3d  Mon.  Jas.  A  Templelon.
Prospect  Hill.  Wednesday  b.  f.  m.    B.  Randolph.
Mannington.  2d  Monday.  H.  L.  Hunt.
Ripley.  Th.  af.  2d  Monday.   C.  N.  Austin.
Chester.  Wed.  af.  1st  Mon.      Edwin  Williams.
Goodson.  Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.    L.  F.  Johnson.
Lovington.  4th  Monday.  Stephen  T.  Dillard.
Windsor.  1st  Friday.  D.  W.  Kitchen.
Newbern.  Th.  af.  1st  Monday.  Augustine  Bigbie.
Portsmouth.  4th  Monday.  Jas.  Williamson.
Kingwood.  2d  &  4lh  Mondays.    Jas.  C.  McGrew.
Ashland.  Friday  before  f.  m.    St.  G.  Tucker.
Littleton.  4th  Saturday.
Fetterman.  2d  &  4th  Mondays.    W.  H.  Freman,  Jr.
Covington.  3d  Monday.  H.  H.  Robertson.
Point  Pleasant.  Tu.  on  or  b.  f.  m.       W.  T.  Minturn.  ,
Lebanon.
New  Cumberland.  Thur.  on  or  b.  f.  m.  Jos.  Burnes.
White  Hall.  Saturday  af.  f.  m.      Levi  Hiett.
Bethany.  Friday  b.  f.  m.  D.  S.  Forney.
Cabin  Point.  1st  Thursday.  Ed.  C.  Murdaugh.
,Buffalo.  1st  &  3d  Fridays.       Childers  Lannum.
Summersville.  Wednesday  b.  f.  m.   N.  A.  Patterson.
Cameron.  Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.  J.  H.  Dickey.
Wayne.    John  C.  Wheeler.
Lynchburg.    Jas.  Leftwich.
Richmond.    Beverly  R.  Welford.
Cypress  Chapel
 Richard  E.  Parker.
Rye  Cove.
Martin's  Station.
Upperville.
Richmond.
Pamplin's  Depot.
Moorefield.
GRAND  CHAPTER.
The  Grand  Chapter  of  Virginia  was  organized  May  1st,  5808.  Its  Annual
Convocations  are  held  in  the  City  of  Eichmond,  on  the  Thursdays  succeeding  the
second  Mondays  in  December.  This  Grand  Chapter  is  sovereign  and  independ-
ent. There  are  34  subordinate  Chapters  in  this  jurisdiction,  25  of  which  made
returns  at  the  Annual  Convocation,  in  December,  5859,  and  charters  were  granted
for  2  Chapters.  The  25  Chapters  making  returns  had  a  total  of  1105  members.
Amount  of  receipts  from  22  Chapters,  $319  50-    7  Chapters  made  no  returns.
28

--- Sayfa 440 ---
428
world's  masonic. register.
SUBORDINATE  CHAPTERS.
Location.  Time  of  Meeting.
1  Norfolk  United,
2  Union,
3  Bichmond,
4  Old  Dominion,
5  Jerusalem,
6  Rockingham,
7  Petersburg  Union,
8  Fincastle,
10  Eureka,
11  Mount  Horeb,
12  Winchester,
13  Fairfax,
14  Mount  Vernon,
15  Euclid,
16  Bethesda,
18  Aholiab,
19  Wheeling  Union,
20  Mount  Nebo,
23  Adoniram,
24  Sussex,
28  Halifax,
30  Abingdon,
33  Cumberland  Doric,
34  Fitzwhylsonn,
35  Nelson,
37  Dove,
38  McDaniel,
40  Clinton,
41  Easley,
43  Lafayette,
44  Dove,
45  Guyandotte,
46  Clarksburg,
47  Farmville,
Norfolk.
Staunton.
Bichmond.
Liberty.
Charlestown.
Harrisonburg.
Petersburg.
Fincastle.
Lynchburg.
Portsmouth.
Winchester.
Orange  C.  H.
Alexandria.
Danville.
Middleway.
Hicksford.
Wheeling.
Suffolk.
Clarksville.
Sussex  C.  H.
Halifax  C.  H.
Abingdon.
Cartersville.
Fredericksburg.
Morgantown.
Union.
Big  Lick.
Lewisburg.
Chester  Springs.
Bichmond.
Louisa  C.  H.
Guyandotte.
Clarksburg.
Farmville.
1st  Monday.
2d  Tuesday.
1st  Friday.
Friday  before  2d  Saturday.
3d  Monday.
3d  Tuesday.
3d  Monday.
1st  Tuesday.
2d  Saturday.
2d  Monday.
1st  Friday.
Fri.  on  or  aft.  f.  m.
1st  Monday.    -
4th  Monday.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
2d  Thursday.
2d  Monday.
2d  Monday.
Friday  before  3d  Satnrday.
2d  Thursday.
Friday  before  4th  Monday.
4th  Monday.
1st  Saturday.
2d  Tuesday.
Tuesday  after  4th  Monday.
Tuesday  after  3d  Monday.
4th  Thursday.
Tuesday  after  4th  Monday.
Friday  before  3d  Monday.
3d  Friday.
Friday  after  full  moon.
Thursday  on  or  before  f.  m.
GRAND  COMMANDERT.
This  Grand  Commandery  was  formed  prior  to  1826.  It  holds  its  Annual
Assembly  in  the  City  of  Richmond,  on  the  Thursday  succeeding  the  second
Monday  in  December.  It  has  10  subordinate  Commanderies  under  its  jurisdic-
tion, 8  of  which  returned  408  members.    Amount  of  receipts,  $165  75.
SUBORDINATE  COMMANDERIES.
Time  op  Meeting.
4th  Monday.
4th  Tuesday.
1st  Monday.
No.
1
2
Name.
Wheeling,
Bichmond,
Location.
Wheeling.
Bichmond.
3
Gill,
Morgantown.

--- Sayfa 441 ---
VIRGINIA.
429
No.
Name.
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
4 De  Molay,
Lynchburg.
3d  Saturday.
5 Portsmouth,
Portsmouth.
3d  Monday.
6 Appomattox,
Petersburg.
3d  Saturday.
7 Dove,
Danville.
2d  Monday.
8 Suffolk,
Suffolk.
Tuesday  after  1st  Monday.
9 Palestine,
Martinsburg.
2d  Monday.
10
Meherrin,
Hicksford.
Wednesday  af.  2d  Sunday.
SUBSCRIBERS'  NAMES.
ABINGDON.
Baldwin,  Rev.  Noah  C.     Abingdon,  48  ;  Abingdon  chap.,  30.
Barr,  Rev.  George  R.     Chaplain,  Abingdon,  48;  Abingdon  chap.,  30.  v
Barr,  W.  P.,  M.D.    Abingdon,  48 ;  P.  H.  P.,  Abingdon  chap.,  30.
Heiskil,  Milton  Y.,  M.D.     Abingdon,  48  ;  Abingdon  chap.,  30.
Norris,  Wm,  Tailor.     Abingdon,  48 ;  Abingdon  chap.,  30.
Rodfer,  Wm.,  House  Carpenter.     Abingdon,  48 ;  Abingdon  chap.,  30.
Rohr,  Philip,  Merchant  Tailor.     P.  M.,  Abingdon,  48;   P.  K.,  Abingdon
chap.,  30.
BEENWOOD,  Marshall  County.
Bowers,  V.  W.,  Iron  Roller,  Virginia  Nail  Works.     Ohio,  101 ;  Wheeling
Union  chap.,  19;  Wheeling  com.  1.
Gardner,  Lewis,  Iron  Heater,  Virginia  Nail  Works.     Ohio,  101.
Jenkins,  Wilson,  Nailer,  Virginia  Nail  Works.     Ohio,  101.
Sprout,  Clark,  Nailer,  Virginia  Nail  Works.     Ohio,  101.
Warffuel,   Samuel,  Nailer,   Virginia  Nail  Works.     Ohio,  101;    Wheeling
Union  chap.,  19.
BBTJCETOWH',  Frederick  Co.
Mayers,  Geo.  W.  L.,  Foreman  of  Bridge  Builders  B.  and  O.  Railroad.   Dallas,
132.
CAMEBON,  Marshall  County.
Commerford,  James,  Blacksmith,  Cameron  Station  B.  and  O.  Railroad.    Past
J.  W.,  Cameron,  180.
Head,  W.  T.,  Salesman  in  Dry  Goods  Store.     S.  W.,  Cameron,  180.
Hosack,  W.  H.,  Salesman  and  Book-keeper  in  Dry  Goods  House.    Cameron,
180.
CHTJCKATUCK.
Wicks,  Captain  B.  F.,  Mariner.     Atlantic,  2.
LUETENBEKG-  COTJBT  HOUSE.
Anderson,  Thos.  C.    Flat  Rock,  83.
Galen,  Hail  T.,  Farmer.    Steward  and  Tyler,  Flat  Rock,  83.

--- Sayfa 442 ---
430  world's  masonic  register.
lyetchbttbg.
McDaniel,  Jno.  Eobins.     W.  M.,  Marshall,  39 ;  H.  P.,  Eureka  chap.,  10  ;  P.
G.  H.  P.,  Grand  E.  A.  Chap.,  Va. ;  D.  G.  M.,  Grand  Com. ;  Grand  Master  of '
Virginia ;   Commander-in-Chief  Sov.  Grand  Consistory  of  Virginia ;   and  Sov.
Grand  Insp.  General  of  the  Supreme  Council  of  33d  for  Southern  Jurisdiction
of  U.  S.
NORFOLK.
Baum,  Nathan,  Butcher.     Norfolk,  1 ;  Norfolk  chap.,  1.
Bayto,  Joaquin,  Tobacconist.     Norfolk,  1.
Brock,  Wilson  S.,  Grocer.     Norfolk,  1 ;  Norfolk  chap.,  1.
Davis,  John  W.,  Sail-maker.     Norfolk,  1.
Hall,  Captain  Thomas  Dixon,  Mariner.  Norfolk,  1 ;  St.  Andrew's,  29  ;  Pe-
tersburg chap.,  7.  _
Hull,  Peter  C,  Architect  and  Builder,  8  Cove  Street;  residence,  81  West
Queen  Street.    Norfolk,  1 ;  Norfolk  B.  A.  chap.,  1.
Lewellyn,  Charles  B.,  firm  of  Thos.  R.  Lee  &  Co.,  Blacksmiths,  6  Wide  Wa-
ter Street;  residence,  Jerusalem,  Norfolk  County.     Atlantic,  2.
Merwin,  S.  0.,  Commission  Merchant.     Norfolk,  1.
Owen,  William  B.,  Carriage-maker.    Norfolk,  1.
Bobinson,  John,  Cabinet-maker.     Norfolk,  1.
Taylor,  Captain  Babel,  Steamer  Kahukee ;  residence,  4  Second  Cross  Street,
Briggs's  Point.    Norfolk,  1;  Norfolk  B.  A.  chap.,  1.
Webber,  John,  Gunner  U.  S.  Navy.     Norfolk,  1 ;  Norfolk  chap.,  1.
PLEASANT  GBOVE.
Hurt,  Mumford  B.,  M.D.    Plat  Bock,  83.
Johns,  John  A.,  Jr.,  M.D.    Plat  Bock,  83.
PORTSMOUTH.
Grice,  Charles  A.  P.  M.,  Portsmouth  Naval,  100 ;  P.  H.  P.,  Mount  Horeb
chap.,  11 ;  G.  C,  Portsmouth  com.,  5  ;  P.  G.  H.  P.,  Grand  Chapter ;  P.  G.  M.,
Grand  Com.
Miles,  Joseph  M.,  Merchant.  Portsmouth  Naval,  100;  Mount  Horeb  chap.,
11 ;  Portsmouth  com.,  5.
RICHMOND.
De  Witt,  Thomas  H.,  Secretary  Board  Public  Works  of  Virginia.  Treas.,
St.  John's,  36  ;  Lafayette  chap.,  43 ;  Prelate,  Richmond  com.,  2.
Wellford,  Jr.,  Beverly  R.,  Lawyer.  P.  M.,  Fredericksburg,  4 ;  Dove,  51  ;
Fitzwhylsonn  chap.,  34.
ROSEBY'S  BOCK,  Marshall  Co.
Martin,  L.  G.,  Merchant.     J.  W.,  Marshall  Union,  37,  Moundsville,  Va.
SUFFOLK.
Browne,  James  S.,  M.D.,  Practitioner  of  Medicine.    Chuckatuck,  77.

--- Sayfa 443 ---
VIRGINIA.  431
WAYNESBOBOUGH.
King,  John  B.,  Merchant.    Staunton,  13 ;  Mount  Sinai  chap.,  2.
WHEELING,  Ohio  County.
Albright,  Henry  A.,  Coppersmith,  Wheeling  Station  B.  and  0.  Eailroad.
Ohio,  101.
Archibald,  John,  Miner,  South  Wheeling.     Ohio,  101.
Beebe,  Lewis  H.,  Dentist.     Wheeling,  128.
Belville,  Wm.,  Architect,  Eoff  St.,  between  First  and  Second  Sts.,  west  side.
Ohio,  101.
Bonham,  John  L.,  Produce  and  Com.  Merchant,  Main  St.  Sec,  Ohio,  101 ;
G.  M.  3d  Veil,  Wheeling  Union  chap.,  19 ;  Wheeling  com.,  1.
Clement,  Jacob  A.,  Salesman  and  Traveling  Agent,  127  Main  St.  S.  D.,
Wheeling,  128  ;  Wheeling  Union  chap.,  19.
Clohan,  William,  South  Wheeling,  Coal  Merchant.  Ohio,  101 ;  Wheeling
Union  chap.,  19  ;  Wheeling  com.,  1.
Dean,  L.  T.,  Nailer,  Belmont  Nail  Works,  First  St.,  between  Main  and  Market
Sts.     Mahoning,  243,  Pa. ;  Delta  chap.,  96,  Pa.
Flesher,  Henry  C,  Attorney  at  Law,  60  Main  St.  Ohio,  101 ;  Clarksburg
R.  A.  chap.,  46.
Freese,  Isaac,  South  Wheeling,  Heater,  La  Bell  Iron  Works.  Ohio,  101 ;
Wheeling  Union  chap.,  19  ;  Wheeling  com.,  1.
Griffin,  B.  F.,  Mail  Agent  B.  and  O.  Railroad.  Sprigg House.   Wheeling,  128.
Hopkins,  Henry  H.,  Book-keeper,  49  and  51  Main  St.     Ohio,  101.
Keller,  Lewis,  Coffee  House  Proprietor,  Market  Square,  226  Market  St.,  east
side.     Ohio,  101.
Linck,  Charles  A.,  Salesman,  56  Main  St.  Tyler,  Wheeling,  128  ;  Tyler,
Ohio,  101 ;  Tyler,  Wheeling  Union  chap.,  19  ;  Sentinel,  Wheeling  com.,  1.
Mager,  Fadel,  Ordinary  Keeper,  cor.  Main  and  Webster  Sts.     Ohio.,  101.
McClellan,  R.  W.,  Nailer,  Belmont  Nail  Works,  First  St.,  between  Main  and
Market.     Franklin,  221,  Pa.
Morne,  Henry,  Locomotive  Engineer  B.  and  O.  Railroad,  112  Main  St.  Ohio,
101.
Norton,  Edward  B.,  Book-keeper  and  Traveling  Agent,  60  and  62  Main  St.
Sec,  Wheeling,  128 ;  G.  M.  2d  Veil,  Wheeling  Union  chap.,  19.
Norton,  Geo.  W.,  Nail  Manufacturer,  Belmont  Mills.     Ohio,  101.
Reesing,  George  W.,  Family  Grocery,  Fruits,  etc.,  88  Market  St.  S.  D.,
Ohio,  101 ;  Wheeling  Union  chap.,  19  ;  Warden,  Wheeling  com.,  1.
Shaffer,  Wm.,  Jeweler,  29  Main  St.     Ohio,  101 ;  Wheeling  Union  chap.,  19.
Sharrott,  Sampson,  Furnace  Builder.     Ohio,  101.
Simpson,  W.  B.,  Wholesale  Dealer  in  Staple  and  Fancy  Dry  Goods,  Notions,
etc.,  10  Monroe  St.     Ohio,  101 ;  Wheeling  Union  chap.,  19  ;  Wheeling  com.,  1.
Sprucebank,  Abram,  Machinist,  Belmont  Mills.  Fetterman,  170;  Wheeling
Union  chap.,  19.
Taylor,  William,  Manufacturer  and  Dealer  in  Tobacco,  Snuff,  Cigars,  etc.,
Wholesale  and  Retail,  66  Main  St.    Wheeling,  128.

--- Sayfa 444 ---
432  world's  masonic  register.
Tomkins,  Jas.  L.,  Clerk  and  Traveling  Agent,  59  and  61  Main  St.    J.  D.,
Ohio,  101 ;  R.  A.  0.,  Wheeling  Union  chap.,  19;  "Wheeling  com.,  1.
Young,  E.  B.,  Dealer  in  Ladies'  and  Gents'  Pine  Boots,  Shoes,  etc.,  182  Main
St.    Wheeling,  128.
■WOODSTOCK.
Bargett,  William  H.,  Watch  and  Clock  Maker.     Cassia,  142.
Hass,  John,  Commissioner  in  Chancery.     Cassia,  142.
INFLUENCE  OF  FREEMASONRY.
Freemasonry  not  only  recognizes  the  highest  standard  of  morals  as  the  basis
of  the  principles  upon  which  the  institution  is  founded,  but  its  membership  are
required,  by  the  obligations  of  the  Order,  by  the  "  First  Great  Light"  upon
which  these  obligations  were  assumed,  as  well  as  the  duties  obligatory  upon  every
child  of  man,  to  render  obedience  to  the  will  of  the  Supreme  Architect  of  the
universe,  to  live  in  conformity  to  its  laws  and  teachings,  so  as  to  convince  the
world  by  their  examples  that  the  object  of  the  association  is  to  influence  men  to
a  better  course  of  life,  and  thus  promote  the  welfare  of  the  species  by  inducing
others  also  to  live  moral  and  virtuous  lives.  The  "  Charges  of  a  Freemason,"
which  from  remotest  time  have  come  down  to  us  unchanged,  and  which  are  not
subject  to  change,  declare  in  the  commencement  of  the  first  article :  "A  Mason
is  obliged,  by  his  tenure,  to  obey  the  moral  law."  That  is  the  standard  by  which
every  Freemason  is  to  be  judged — by  that  standard  every  Freemason  must
judge  his  brother  Masons  ;  and  those  whose  lives  do  not  square  with  that  test
must  be  considered  as  morally  defective,  morally  maimed,  violators  of  voluntarily
assumed  obligations  and  the  laws  of  God.  It  is  the  duty  of  each  member  of
the  fraternity,  by  his  own  example,  by  a  virtuous  and  goodly  life,  to  give  evidence
that  he  has  not  assumed  his  obligations  in  vain  ;  but  that  his  conduct  is  squared
by  the  teachings  of  the  institution  and  the  divine  laws  upon  which  these  teach-
ings are  based.  It  is  idle  to  suppose  that  a  man  can  be  an  honest  and  true
Freemason  who  does  not  obey  the  moral  law ;  nay,  further,  a  Freemason  who
does  not  give  evidence  by  his  conduct  and  conversation  that  he  has  been
benefited  by  the  teachings  of  Freemasonry,  in  being  a  better  man  than  he  was
before  his  initiation,  cannot  have  been  true  to  himself  nor  the  institution.  The
object  of  Freemasonry  is  to  advance  its  membership  morally  and  intellectually.
A  man  cannot  be  a  Freemason  unless  he  is  a  good  man.  In  becoming  a
member  of  the  fraternity  it  is  expected  that  he  will  observe  the  teachings  of  the
institution,  advance  onward  in  the  path  of  virtue,  and  grow  better  and  wiser  as
he  travels  through  life.  This  is  expected  of  each  and  every  member  of  the
fraternity,  so  that  the  united  membership  of  the  institution  by  the  influence  of
their  examples  will  exercise  a  corresponding  influence  upon  the  people  of  the
world,  and  thus  manifest  that  the  principles  of  Freemasonry  are  good,  and  that
by  living  conformably  to  them  we  become  better  men,  better  citizens,  better
husbands,  and  better  fathers  and  brothers.

--- Sayfa 445 ---
WASHINGTON  TERRITORY.
GRAND  LODGE.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  Washington  Territory  was  organized  December  9,  5858.
Its  Annual  Communications  are  held  in  the  City  of  Olympia,  commencing  on
the  first  Monday  in  September.  At  the  Annual  Communication  in  September,
5860,  the  returns  show  the  following  statistics :  Number  of  Lodges,  9 ;  num-
ber of  Master  Masons,  217  ;  Initiations,  42  ;  Passed,  43;  Raised,  34;  Admit-
ted, 13  ;  Dimitted,  5  ;  Rejected,  11 ;  Suspended,  1 ;  Expelled,  3  ;  Died,  3.
Grand  Lodge  dues,  $387.  Total  receipts  of  Grand  Lodge,  from  all  sources,
from  the  date  of  its  organization  to  the  Annual  Communication  in  5860,  $969  54.
The  officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  elected  at  the  Annual  Communication,  Sep-
tember, 5860,  were  as  follows : —
Selucius  Garfielde,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
John  F.  Damon,  R.  W.  Deputy  Grand  Master.
Lewis  Vat  Vleet,  R.  W.  Senior  Grand  Warden.
James  M.  Bacheldek,  R.  W.  Junior  Grand  Warden.
James  Biles,  R.  W.  Grand  Treasurer.
Thomas  M.  Reed,  R.  W.  Grand  Secretary.
Officers  appointed: — -
B.  C.  Lippincott,  Grand  Chaplain.
Charles  Btles,  Grand  Bible  Bearer.
F.  A.  Wilson,  Grand  Marshal.
Frank  Clark,  Grand  Orator.
Cyrus  Walker,  Senior  Grand  Deacon.
J.  L.  Holbrook,  Junior  Grand  Deacon.
B.  E.  Lombard,  Grand  Standard  Bearer.
John  Webster,  Grand  Sword  Bearer.
W.  H.  Wood,  j
Uran(J  gtewards.
Lewis  Sohns,  3
J.  L.  Myees,  Grand  Tyler.
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.
No.      Lodge.  Location.  Time  op  Meeting.  Master.
1  Olympia,  Olympia.  1st  &  3d  Saturdays.  T.  M.  Reed.
2  Steilacoom,  Steilacoom.  1st  &  3d  Saturdays.  William  H.  Wood.
3  Grand  Mound,  Grand  Mound.  Saturday  b.  f.  m.       T.  R.  Winston.
4  Washington,  Vancouver.  Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.      James  A.  Graham.
5  Franklin,  Teekalet.  Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.      Cyrus  Walker.
6  PortTownsend,  Port  Townsend   G.  0.  Haller.
7  Walla  Walla,  Walla  Walla.    A.B.Roberts.
8  Kane,  Port  Madison.    Benj.  E.  Lombard.
9  St.  John's,  Seattle.    John  Webster.
(433)

--- Sayfa 446 ---
434  world's  masonic  register.
JUDGE  MILDLY.
A  Freemason  ought  always  to  be  governed  by  generous  impulses,  and  judge
mildly  of  the  faults  of  his  brethren,  and  by  gentle  measures  endeavor  to  inspire
the  erring  with  noble  and  just  sentiments.  A  Freemason  ought  not  upon  any
occasion  to  speak  disrespectfully  of  his  brother  in  his  absence,  no  matter  what
the  fault  may  be  or  the  grievance.  It  is  unworthy  at  all  times  to  speak  evil  of
the  absent ;  no  generous  mind  will  be  guilty  of  an  act  so  base,  and  no  one  who
has  bowed  at  our  mystic  altars,  who  appreciates  his  obligations,  and  the  honor
of  his  connection  with  the  institution,  will  so  far  forget  himself  as  to  speak  in
detriment  to  the  character  of  another  who  has  also  knelt  at  the  shrine  of  Free-
masonry.
It  is  not  always  that  those  are  in  the  wrong  whom  we  suppose  so,  and  none
but  a  higher  Power  can  know  the  struggles  the  weak  and  erring  may  have
in  combating  circumstances  and  inclinations  which  impel  them  to  err.  There
may  be  more  virtue  in  the  weak  restraining  their  desires,  the  man  of  strong
passions  in  fighting  against  indulgence,  the  hungered  in  abstaining  from  appro-
priating the  goods  of  others,  than  in  large  contributions  of  the  wealthy  for
benevolent  purposes.  The  man  whose  means  place  him  above  the  temptation  of
want,  whose  education  and  affinities  prevent  him  from  associating  with  the
depraved,  or  those  whose  will  and  determination  are  sufficiently  strong  to  hold
their  passions  in  subjection,  may  never  know,  may  never  be  able  to  appreciate
the  moral  and  mental  struggles  of  those  differently  organized  or  circumstanced.
The  poor  brother  unable  to  pay  his  Lodge  dues,  to  pay  small  debts,  incurred
perhaps  to  sustain  life,  to  pay  even  his  subscription,  may  possess  a  noble  spirit,
and  be  true  and  honest  before  God  and  angels.  Man  is  scarcely  competent  to
judge  his  fellow-man,  because  he  is  unable  to  fathom  the  secret  arcana  of  mo-
tives and  inward  impulses  which  prompt  him  to  act.  We  do  not  speak  of  the
open  violator  of  law,  those  who  set  at  defiance  the  rights,  and  obligations  of  man
and  society;  for  such  are  not,  cannot  be  Freemasons.  But  as  Masons  are  only
men,  and  no  one  ever  entered  the  portals  of  Masonry  without  having  at  least  one
friend,  a  guide,  and  therefore  must  have  possessed  some  good  traits,  let  us  at
least  be  merciful  in  our  judgment;  if  misfortune  has  robbed  such  a  one,  the
humblest  among  us,  of  his  wealth,  and  he  is  reduced  to  poverty  and  want,  or  if,
unable  to  resist  temptations  against  which  he  may  long  and  ardently  have
struggled,  he  finally  was  overcome  and  yielded,  let  our  judgment  be  tempered
with  mercy;  do  not  scorn  him,  do  not  spurn  him  from  society,  do  not  crush  him
so  that  he  may  not  rise  again.  Masonry  is  charity,  heaven-born  and  sympa-
thizing charity,  and  the  noblest  and  most  acceptable  of  its  duties,  those  which
are  rewarded  with  the  highest  meed  in  the  court  of  angels  and  seraphs,  are  the
kind  words  spoken,  the  gentle  admonition  and  good  counsel,  the  timely  aid,  and
the  ennobling  inspirations  to  elevate,  improve,  and  arouse  the  drooping  energies
of  the  lowly  and  fallen.

--- Sayfa 447 ---
WISCONSIN.
GRAND  LODGE.
The  Grand  Lodge  of  Wisconsin  was  organized  December  18,  5843.  The
regular  Annual  Communications  of  the  Grand  Lodge  are  held  at  the  City  of
Milwaukee,  commencing  on  the  second  Tuesday  in  June.  The  membership  of
the  Grand  Lodge  consists  of  the  Grand  Officers,  (except  the  Grand  Tyler,)  Past
Masters,  and  Masters  and  Wardens  of  its  constituent  Lodges.
The  revenue  of  the  Grand  Lodge  is  derived  from  the  following  sources: —
For  Dispensations  for  new  Lodges   $30  00
For  Charters,  in  addition
10  00
For  each  Member  of  a  Lodge
50
For  every  Initiation
1  00
For  Grand  Lodge  Diploma
3  00
For  signing  Diplomas,  with  the  Seal,  if  furnished  by  the
Brethren
1  50
For  Dispensations  for  the  three  Degrees  at  one  meeting    .      5  00
For  other  Dispensations
3  00
There  were  102  chartered  Lodges,  and  11  under  dispensation,  which  made  re-
turns at  the  Annual  Communication  in  June,  5860.  The  returns  give  the  num-
ber of  Master  Masons,  3666 ;  Fellow  Crafts,  188 ;  Entered  Apprentices,  376.
The  work  of  the  Lodges  for  the  past  year,  as  per  returns,  show  that  there  were
Initiated,  623 ;  Passed,  572  ;  Raised,  572 ;  Admitted,  138  ;  Dimitted,  270  ;  Sus-
pended, 108  ;  Expelled,  16  ;  Died,  50  ;  Rejected,  157.  Annual  dues  paid  to  the
Grand  Lodge,  $2445.
The  officers  of  the  Grand  Lodge  for  the  present  Masonic  year  are  :—
Gabriel  Bouck,  M.  W.  Grand  Master.
L.  M.  Strong,  R.  W.  Deputy  Grand  Master.
A.  Sidney  Wood,  W.  Grand  Senior  Warden.
J.  W.  Stewart,  W.  Grand  Junior  Warden.
S.  S.  Daggett,  W.  Grand  Treasurer.
James  B.  Kellogg,  W.  Grand  Secretary.
Rev.  Wm.  H.  Thompson,  W.  Grand  Chaplain.
Ephraim  F.  Ogden,  W.  Grand  Senior  Deacon.
J.  B.  G.  Baxter,  W.  Grand  Junior  Deacon.
M.  L.  Youngs,  W.  Grand  Lecturer.
Carlo  R.  Taylor,  W.  Grand  Marshal.
J.  B.  Moore,  W.  Grand  Sword  Bearer.
Fred.  Borcherdt,  W.  Grand  Pursuivant.
James  Collins,
Henry  Graves,
Bro.  Ebenezer  Clewett,  Grand  Tyler
!•    W.  Grand  Stewards.
Henry  Graves,    )
(435)

--- Sayfa 448 ---
436
world's  masonic  register.
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.
LODGE.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
1  Mineral  Point,
2  Melody,
3  Milwaukee,
4  Warren,
5  Madison,
6  Olive  branch,
9  Jefferson,
10  Morning  Star,
11  Sheboygan,
12  Harmony,
13  Wisconsin,
14  Western  Star,
16  Franklin,
17  Ozaukee,
18  Racine,
20  Lancaster,
21  Washington,
24  St.  John's,
25  Armenia,
26  Fountain,
27  Oshkosh,
28  Burlington,
30  Aurora,
31  Smith,
32  Union,
33  Fort  Winnebago,
34  Baraboo,
36  Albany,
37  Waukesha,
38  Berlin,
40  Horicon,
41  St.  James,
42  Oconomowoc,
43  Hazel  Green,
44  Geneva,
45  Frontier,
46  Lake  Mills,
47  Kenosha,
48  Waupun,
49  Watertown,
50  Hiram,
51  Waverly,
52  Wyocena,
53  Kingston,
54  Jerusalem,
55  Janesville,
Mineral  Point.
Platteville.
Milwaukee.
Potosi.
Madison.
New  Diggings.
Jefferson.
Beloit.
Sheboygan.
Delavan.
Milwaukee.
Janesville.     v
Highland.
Port  Washington.
Bacine.
Lancaster.
Green  Bay.
Sheboygan.
Shullsburg.
Fond  Du  Lac.
Oshkosh.
Burlington.
Milwaukee.
Monroe.
Evansville.
Portage  City.
Baraboo.
Albany.
Waukesha.
Berlin.
Horicon.
East  Troy.
Oconomowoc.
Hazel  Green.
Geneva.
La  Crosse.
Lake  Mills.
Kenosha.
Waupun.
Watertown.
Madison.
Appleton.
Wyocena.
Kingston.
Thompsonville.
Jan«sville.
1  st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
Thur.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thur.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Thur.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Every  Thursday.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  Friday.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
Th.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
1st  &.3d  Thursdays.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
Tuesday  before  f.  m.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Monday  on  or  b.  f.  m
Mon.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.
R.  De  Los  Pulford.
Wm.  Grin  dell.
Byron  Kilbourn.
David  H.  Wright.
H.  C.  Van  Osdell.
A.  T.  Colburn.
Jas.  Collins.
Chas.  H.  Geselschaft.
W.  T.  Palmer.
Erastus  Lewis.
H.  M.  Billings.
Lafayette  Towsley.
W.  P.  Spafard.
F.  P.  Liscum.
C.  E.  Crane.
Benj.  E.  Sanford.
Wm.  L.  Robinson.
Wm.  H.  Hiner.
C.  A.  Weisbrod.
N.  R.  Norton.
Geo.  Bremer.
C.  M.  Perry.
J.  M.  Evans.
Alvin  B.  Alden.
Henry  A.  Peck.
Wm.  H.  Peebles.
Wm.  Blair.
Thos.  J.  Warner.
Wm.  M.  Jones.
Hiram  Medbery.
Isaac  Stockwell.
John  T.  Wentworth.
J.  B.  G.  Baxter.
G.  H.  Bidwell.
O.  Foster.
W.  E.  Howard.
Henry  Graves.
Jas.  K.  Proudfit.
Tracy  P.  Bingham.
R.  C.  Rockwood.
S.  G.  Seaton.
.  D.  P.  Wooster.
Ira  C.  Jenks.

--- Sayfa 449 ---
WISCONSIN.
437
No.        Lome.
LOOATION.
Time  of  Meeting.
Master.
56  St.  Croix,
Hudson.
J.  D.  Seely.
57  St.  John's,
Whitewater.
Wed.  on  or  bef.  f.  m New.  M.  Littlejohn.
58  Muscoda,
Muscoda.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
J.  B.  Moore.
59  Markesan,
Markesan.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Lovell  Moore,  Jr.
60  Valley,
Sparta.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
A.  H.  Isham.
61  Kane,
Neenah.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Ira  A.  Torry.
62  Vesper,
Mayville.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m. N.  F.  Henry.
63  Waterloo,
Waterloo.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays Wm.  G.  Munson.
64  Evening  Star,
Darlington.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
O.  G.  Dart.
65  Manitowoc,
Manitowoc.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
Elijah  K.  Rand.
66  Richland,
Richland  Centre.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays Danl.  Badger  Priest.
67  Fox  Lake,
Fox  Lake.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Arie  Banta.
68  Palmyra,
Palmyra.
Thurs.  on  or  bef.  f.  m .  Thos.  P.  Turner.
69  Fulton,
Fulton.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
0.  D.  Peck.
70  Orion,
Richmond.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.
71  Quincy,
Friendship.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
M.  F.  Cuppernell.
72  Dodge  County. Beaver  Dam.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
Lorenzo  Merrill.
73  Kegonsa,
Stoughton.
1st  Friday  b.  f.  m.
S.  C.  Buckman.
74  Black  River,
Black  River  Falls.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
Wm.  Moore.
75  Columbus,
Columbus.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Silas  Axtell.
76  Plover,
Plover.
Thur.  on  or  b.  f.  m. Luther  Hanchett.
77  Elkhorn,
Elkhorn.
2d  &  4th  Weds.
Lot  Mayo.
78  Dells,
Newport.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
Harvey  Bowman.
79  Reedsburg,
Reedsburg.
Friday  of  f.  m.
J.  Mackey.
80  Independence,
Milwaukee.
Every  Friday.
A.  V.  H.  Carpenter.
81  Northern  Light,  Mauston.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m. John  Turner.
82  Weyauwega,
Weyauwega.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
L.  Bostedo.
83  Concordia,
Madison.
Every  Wednesday.
Fr.  Sauthoff.
84  La  Belle,
Viroqua.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m. Jeremiah  M.  Rusk.
85  Des  Peres,
Depere.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Andrew  Reid.
86  Solomon,
Juneau.
1st  Friday.
Chas.  Billinghurst.
89  Pepin,
Pepin.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
90  Waucoma,
Cooksville.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m Gideon  E.  Newman.
91  Oxford,
Oxford.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
N.  Ritter.
92  Belle  City,
Racine.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
H.  W.  Burbeck.
93  Evergreen,
Stevens  Point.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays Wm.  McNair.
94  Bicknell,
Brodhead.
Every  Friday.
Chas.  W.  Clinton.
95  Ripon,
Ripon.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Wm.  M.  Taggart.
96  Temple,
Waterford.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays. H.  D.  Morse.
97  Crescent,
Mazo  Manie.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Barney  Campbell.
98  Byran,
Mentis  li  a.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays
Jos.  Keyes.
99  Lodi  Valley,
Lodi.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m. Wm.  N.  Baker.
100  Fairfield,
Fairfield.
2d  &  4th  Weds.
S.  D.  Serl.
101  Beautiful  Grove,Boscobel.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
Geo.  Haw.
102  Marquette,
Marquette.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m. H.  Van  Valkenbergh.
103  Juneau,
New  Lisbon.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Duncan  McKercher.
104  Astrea,
Tort  Washington.
Every  Wednesday.
Leopold  Eghart.
105  N.  Western,
Prescott.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays. G.  H.  Nichols.
106  Prairie  DuChien  Prairie  Du  Chien.
Every  Wednesday.
J.  P.  Perret  Gentil.

--- Sayfa 450 ---
438
WORLD'S   MASONIC  REGISTER.
LODGjS.
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.  Masteb.
  Frederic  Borcberdt.
1st  &  3d  Weds.  D.  W.  Davis.
  A.  Sanders.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.    Harmon  W.  Colton.
Wed.  on  or  bef.  f.  m.  Storrs  Hall.
  L.  B.  Foote.
1st  Mon.  after  f.  m.    Smith  L.  Wilkinson.
1st  &  3d  Weds.  Ira  Curtis.
  Thos.  McWilliams.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.    Reuben  Willson.
  Chas.  C.  Crane.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.    Geo.  W.  Parkison.
1st  &  3d  Saturdays.  Geo.  W.  Burrall.
  Luzerne  Frost.
  Levi  H.  Nichols.
2d  &  4th  Saturdays.  Wm.  Goodman.
  Linus  B.  Brainard.
  J.  M.  Weber.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.    Elihu  B.  Baxter.
Every  Monday.  Calvin  Serl.
  Henry  llginfritz.
  Stephen  J.  Carpenter.
107  Tracy,
108  Neosho,
109  Biver  Falls,
110  Lowell,
111  Bosendale,
112  Eau  Claire,
113  Eureka,
114  Palestine,
115  Robt.  Morris,
116  Sharon,
117  Trempealeau,
118  Warden,  "
119  Dodgeville,
120  Hartford,
121  Delavan,
122  Bark  River,
123  Waupaca,
124  Columbia,
125  Salem,,
126  Darien,
127  Lebanon,
U.  D.  Grand  Rapids,
Manitowoc.
Neosho.
River  Falls.
Lowell.
Rosendale.
Eau  Claire.
Prairie  Du  Sac.
Lone  Rock.
Eagle.
Sharon.
Trempealeau.
Wiota.
Dodgeville.
Hartford.
Delavan.
Hartland.
Waupaca.
Kilbourn  City.
Salem.
Darieu.
Springfield.
Grand  Rapids.
GRAND  CHAPTER.
Organized  February  13th,  5850.
This  Grand  Chapter  holds  its  Annual  Convocations  on  the  first  Wednesday
in  February.  Its  Annual  Convocation  in  5861  will  be  held  in  the  City  of
Milwaukee.  This  Grand  Chapter  is  subordinate  to  the  General  Grand  Chapter.
There  are  21  subordinate  Chapters  in  Wisconsin.  The  returns  of  20  Chapters
in  February,  5860,  give  the  following  totals :  Number  of  Members,  593 ;  Ex-
altations, 117;  Suspensions,  16;  Deaths,  6;  Dimissions,  31;  Rejections,  6;
Dues,  $669.
SUBORDINATE  CHAPTERS.
No.       Name.
1  Milwaukee,
2  Washington,
3  Kenosha,
4  Madison,
5  Janesville,  U.  D.
6  Iowa,
7  Wisconsin,
8  Warren,
9  Beloit,
10  Harmony,
11  Howell,
Location.
Milwaukee.
Platteville.
Kenosha.
Madison.
Janesville.
Mineral  Point.
Milwaukee.
Green  Bay.
Beloit.
Sheboygan.
Watertown.
Time  op  Meeting.
Every  Tuesday.
2d  Tuesday.
3d  Wednesday.
2d  and  4th  Mondays.
1st  and  3d  Thursdays.
Every  Monday.
2d  and  4th  Mondays.
2d  and  4th  Wednesdays.
1  st  and  3d  Mondays.
2d  Tuesday.

--- Sayfa 451 ---
WISCONSIN.
439
No.
Name.
Location.
Time  oe  Meeting.
12
Orient,
Racine.
1st  and  3d  Fridays.
13
Smith,
La  Crosse.
Thursday  before  f.  m.
14
Portage,
Portage.
1st  Monday.
15
Tyrian,
Oshkosh.
1st  and  3d  Mondays.
16
Manitowoc,
Manitowoc.
17
Elkkorn,
Elkhorn.
1st  and  3d  Wednesdays.
18
Greenlake,
Berlin.
1st  and  3d  Wednesdays.
19
Sparta,  U.  D.,
Sparta.
20
Darlington,  U.  D.,
Fond  du  Lac.
1st  Wednesday.
21
Palestine,  U.  D.,
Monroe.
GRAND  COUNCIL
Organized  5857.
The  last  Annual  Meeting  of  this  Grand  Council  was  held  in  the  City  of
Madison,  October  27th,  5859.  Its  next  Annual  Meeting  will  be  held  on  the
first  Wednesday  of  February,  5861.  It  has  4  subordinate  Councils  under  its
jurisdiction,  viz. :
SUBORDINATE  COUNCILS.
No.     Name.
1  Beloit,
2  Gebal,
Location.
Beloit.
Janesville.
No.      Name.
3     Madison,
U.  D
Location.
Madison.
Milwaukee.
GRAND    COMMANDERT.
Organized  October  20th,  1859.
The  Annual  Conclaves  of  this  Grand  Commandery  are  held  at  the  City  of
Milwaukee  on  the  first  Wednesdays  of  January.  It  has  3  subordinate  Com-
manderies,  which  have  a  total  of  111  Members.
SUBORDINATE  COMMANDERIES.
No.  Name.  Location.
3     Robert  Macoy,     Madison.
No.        Name.
Location.
1    Wisconsin,
Milwaukee.
2    Janesville,
Janesville.
SUBSCRIBERS'  NAMES.
JABTESVILLB.
Addy,  William,  Merchant  Tailor.    Janesville,  55  ;  Janesville  chap.,  5.
Bradley,  William,  Produce  Dealer.    Western  Star,  14.
Bunster,  Henry  B.,  President  of  Janesville  City  Bank.    P.  M.,  Western  Star,
14;  Janesville  chap.,  5  ;  Wisconsin  com.,  1.

--- Sayfa 452 ---
440  world's  masonic  register.
Chapin,  Calvin,  Bricklayer.  P.  M.,  Western  Star,  14  ;  P.  H.  P.,  Janesville
chap.,  5.
Cobb,  William  P.,  Lumber  Dealer.     Janesville,  55  ;  Janesville  chap.,  5.
Dunn,  Charles  W.,  Grocer.     Western  Star,  14.
Fluent,  L.  M.,  Carpenter  and  Joiner.  Janesville,  55 ;  P.  S.  W.,  Janesville
chap.,  5.
Goodwin,  P.  S.,  Railroad  Agent.    Western  Star,  14.
Joseph,  B.,  Merchant.     Janesville,  55.
King,  Chauncey  P.,  Attorney  at  Law.  Western  Star,  14 ;  P.  H.  P.,  Janes-
ville chap.,  5.
Lewis,  Erastus,  M.D.  P.  M.,  Western  Star,  14;  P.  G.  J.  W.,  Grand  Lodge ;
P.  H.  P.,  Janesville  chap.,  5;  Grand  Treas.,  Grand  Chapter.
Lightbody,  Samuel,  Cashier  Janesville  City  Bank.  Western  Star,  14 ;  Janes-
ville chap.,  5  ;  Wisconsin  com.,  1.
May,  J.  Milton,  Real  Estate  Broker.    Western  Star,  14 ;  Janesville  chap.,  5.
Miller,  A.  B.,  Civil  Engineer  and  Surveyor.     Janesville,  55.
Mitchell,  John,  M.D.     Western  Star,  14 ;  Janesville  chap.,  5.
Murdock,  William,  Grocer.  P.  M.,  Janesville,  55  ;  P.  P.  S.,  Janesville
chap.,  5.
Pease,  John  J.  R.,  Attorney  at  Law.  P.  M.,  Western  Star,  14 ;  Janesville,
55;  Janesville  chap.,  5.
Rich,  Sumner  H.,  Grocer.     Janesville,  55.
Rines,  Capt.  Stover,  Real  Estate  Broker.  Western  Star,  14 ;  Janesville
chap.,  5.
Webber,  Charles  S.,  Locomotive  Engineer.    Mount  Vernon,  64,  Ohio.
LAKE  MILLS.
Austin,  G.  W.,  Parmer.    P.  M.,  Lake  Mills,  46 ;  Howell  chap.,  11.
Eddy,  Thomas,  Grocer  and  Boot  and  Shoe  Dealer.     Lake  Mills,  46.
Morrell,  John  L.,  Boot  and  Shoe  Maker.     Lake  Mills,  46.
Palmer,  Orson  W.,  Physician  and  Surgeon.     Lake  Mills,  46.
Shout,  Q.  A.,  Mechanic  and  Lumber  Dealer.     Lake  Mills,  46.
Teed,  S.  R.,  Boot  and  Shoe  Maker.    Sec,  Lake  Mills,  46.
Whitney,  0.  D.,  Lake  Mills  House.     Lake  Mills,  46.
MIBTEKAL  POINT.
Smith,  William  Rudolph,  Lawyer.  Mineral  Point,  1 ;  Iowa  chap.,  6  ;  P.  G.
Master  and  P.  G.  Sec,  Grand  Lodge.  Made  a  Mason  in  Rising  Star,  126,
Philadelphia,  1812.
MONBOE.
Gurley,  James  D.,  Produce  Dealer.    Mount  Vernon,  64,  Ohio.
PLATTEVU.LE.
Bushnell,  Allen  R.,  Attorney  and  Counselor  at  Law.  Melody,  2  ;  Washing-
ton, chap.,  2.
McCarn,  L.,  Banker.     Washington  chap.,  2.

--- Sayfa 453 ---
WISCONSIN.  441
KACINE.
Kelble,  Mathias,  Attorney  at  Law.    Mount  Vernon,  64,  Ohio.
SPEIWGVILLE.
Morse,  William  A.,  Merchant.  Lockport,  73,  N.  Y. ;  Ames  chap.,  88,  N.  Y. ;
Genesee  com.,  10,  N.  Y.
VIKOQUA,  Bad  Axe  County.
Herron,  William  A.,  Farmer.     La  Belle,  84.
Lincoln,  S.  0.,  Wholesale  and  Retail  Dealer  in  Dry  Goods,  Groceries,  Hard-
ware, Crockery,  and  China  Ware,  Boots  and  Shoes,  Ready-made  Clothing,  etc.,
etc.;  Clark  and  Lincoln,  Forwarding  and  Commission  Merchants.  S.  W.,
La  Belle,  84 ;  Smith  chap.,  13.
Terhune,  William  F.,  Attorney  at  Law  and  Land  Agent.    Sec,  La  Belle,  84.
THE  LEVEL  OF  TIME.
Freemasonry,  among  its  beautiful  and  sublime  lessons,  teaches  us  that  life  on
earth  is  only  of  limited  duration,. and  each  candidate  is  impressed  in  symbolic
illustration,  that  "we  are  all  traveling  on  the  level  of  time  to  that  undiscovered
country  from  whose  bourne  no  traveler  returns."  The  object  of  this  teaching  is
to  influence  man  to  lead  a  virtuous  life,  to  look  upon  God  as  the  summum  bonum
of  perfection,  who  doeth  all  things  well,  so  that  after  the  termination  of  his  pil-
grimage on  earth,  after  a  life  well  spent  in  useful  employment,- he  may  enjoy  a
happy,  blissful  future  in  the  realms  of  cloudless  eternity.  Oh  that  Freemasons
would  only  rightly  consider  the  import  of  the  expressive  and  significant  lesson
taught  in  the  illustration  of  the  Level !  Oh  glorious,  happy  thought,  that  we  are
not  as  the  flower  that  withers  or  like  the  tree  that  is  cut  down !  Our  bodies
truly  will  be  consigned  to  the  narrow  house  of  death,  but  there  is  no  confining
the  immortal  spirit.  More  free  and  untrammeled  than  thought  in  the  earthly
life,  will  be  the  spirit  when  divested  of  mortality.  Is  it  not  our  duty  to  wear  the
white  lamb-skin  in  our  daily  life,  in  our  commingling  with  the  world  and  with
those  who  share  our  best  affections,  so  that  the  spirit,  when  disinthralled  from
its  earthly  tabernacle,  pure,  unspotted,  and  unpolluted,  may  enter  into  the
spiritual  realm  to  enjoy  the  association  of  the  angelic  throng  ?  Life  has  its
joys,  but  the  joys  of  a  life  of  virtue  and  goodness  endure  evermore.  Time  cannot
efface  or  rub  out  the  influence  of  a  good  deed.  A  life  of  virtue  and  usefulness
is  rewarded  on  earth,  and  its  happy  effects  go  with  us  beyond  the  grave.  Let
each  Freemason  live  up  ,to  the  teachings  of  the  Order,  and  all  who  do  so  will,
when  life's  scenes  are  over,  be  welcomed  into  the  land  of  unfading  flowers  by
blessed,  happy  spirits  who  have  gone  before.  This  life  is  but  of  limited  duration.
It  is  a  probationary  state.  To  live  well,  so  as  to  be  acceptable  to  our  Heavenly
Father,  is  our  duty  here.  Brethren,  it  ought  to  be  to  us  a  most  pleasing  duty,
which  we  should  strive  for  with  all  our  soul,  might,  and  strength.  If  our  heart
is  in  the  right  place,  and  we  learn  the  lessons  of  Freemasonry  well,  we  will,
with  all  the  powers  of  our  soul  and  mind,  strive  to  merit  the  approval  of  Him
from  whom  all  goodness  and  blessings  proceed.

--- Sayfa 454 ---
442
WORLD'S   MASONIC  "REGISTER.
STATISTICAL  TABLE  OF  GRAND  LODGES.
GRAND  LODGES.
NO.  OF
LODGES.
NO.  OP
MEMBERS.
ORGANIZED.
ANNUAL  MEETINGS.
PLACE  OF  MEETING.
Alabama,
236
8,093
June  14,  5821.
1st  Monday  in  Dec.
Montgomery.
Arkansas,
156
4,113
Feb.   22,  5832.
1st  Monday  in  Nov.
Little  Rock.
California,
180
5,055
April  18,  5850.
2d  Tuesday  in  May.
Sacramento.
Canada,
140
7,000
Oct.    10,  5855.
1st  Wednesday  in  July .  Movable.
Connecticut,
64
5,854
July     8,  5789.
2d  Wednesday  in  May
t  New  Haven  and
I      Hartford  alt.
Delaware,
12
553
June     6,  5806.
4th  Monday  in  June.
Wilmington.
Dist.  Columbia,
11
776
Dec.    11,  5810.
1st  Tuesday  in  Nov.
Washington.
Florida,
34
.1,497
July     5,  5830.
2d  Monday  in  January .  Tallahassee.
Georgia,
204
12,310
Dec.    16,  5786.
Last  Wed.  in  October. Macon.
Illinois,
346
12,725
April    6,  5840.
1st  Tuesday  in  Oct.
Springfield.
Indiana,
263
9,727
Jan.   12,  5818.
4th  Monday  in  May.
Indianapolis.
Iowa,
153
4,671
Jan.     8,  5844.
1st  Tuesday  in  June.
Movable.
Kansas,
32
741
Mar.  17,  5856.
3d  Tuesday  in  October .  Topeka.
Kentucky,
323
11,665
Oct.    16,  5800.
2d  Monday  in  October .  Louisville.
Louisiana,
111
4,661
July   11,  5812. 2d  Monday  in  Feb.
New  Orleans.
Maine,
99
4,319
June     1,  5820.
1st  Tuesday  in  May.
Portland.
Maryland,
39
2,028
April  17,  5787.
3d  Monday  in  Nov.
Baltimore.
Massachusetts,
110
6,741
July   30,  5733.
2d  Wednesday  in  Dec. Boston.
Michigan,
122
5,816
June  28,  5826. 2d  Wednesday  in  Jan. Detroit.
Minnesota,
31
.     786
Feb.   23,  5853.
4th  Tuesday  in  Oct.
St.  Paul.
Mississippi,
238
10,560
July   27,  5818.
1st  Monday  in  Jan.
Movable.
Missouri,
205
6,862
April  23,  5821.
4th  Monday  in  May.
St.  Louis.
Nebraska,
6
176
Sept.  23,  5857.
1st  Tuesday  in  June.
Movable.
New  Hampshire,
45
2,377
July     8,  5789.
Tu.  af.  1st  Wed.  in  June.  Concord.
New  Jersey,
54
2,723
Dec.    18,  5786. Wed.  af.  2d  Tu.  in  Jan. Trenton.
New  York,
465
26,977
Sept.    5,  5787.
1st  Tuesday  in  June.
New  York.
North  Carolina,
133
6,742
Jan.    14,  5771.
1st  Monday  in  Dec.
Baleigh.
Ohio,
295
14,150
Jan.     4,  5808.
3d  Tuesday  in  October .  Movable.
Oregon,
22
623
Aug.  16,  5851.
2d  Monday  in  June.
Movable.
Pennsylvania,
173
11,983
Sept.  26,  5786.
1st  Monday  in  Dec.
Philadelphia.
Rhode  Island,
16
1,517
June  21,  5791.
25th  June.
Movable.
South  Carolina,
92
3,337
Feb.     6,  5787.
3d  Tuesday  in  Nov.
Movable.
Tennessee,
218
11,102
Oct.    14,  5813.
1st  Monday  in  Oct.
Nashville.
Texas,
224
8,215
Dec.   20,  5837. 2d  Monday  in  June.
Movable.
Vermont,
52
2,754
Oct.    14,  5794. 2d  Wed.  in  January.
Movable.
Virginia,
171
6,167
Oct.    13,  5778. 2d  Monday  in  Deo.
Richmond.
Washington,
9
217
Deo.      9,  5858.
1st  Monday  in  Sept.
Olympia.
Wisconsin,
113
3,666
Dec.    18,  5843. 2d  Tuesday  in  June.
Milwaukee.
5,147    228,279

--- Sayfa 455 ---
GRAND   MASTERS   AND   GRAND   SECRETARIES   OF    GRAND   LODGES.
443
GRAND  MASTERS  AND  GRAND  SECRETARIES  OF  GRAND
LODGES,  AND  THEIR  ADDRESSES.
STATE.
GRAND  MASTER.
ADDRESS.
GRAND  SECRETARY.
ADDRESS.
Alabama,
R.  H.  Ervin,
Camden.
Daniel  Sayre,
Montgomery.
Arkansas,
E.  H.  English,
Little  Rock.
T.  D.  Merrick,
Little  Rock.
California,
N.  Greene  Curtis,
Sacramento.
Alex.  G.  Abell,
San  Francisco.
Canada,
T.  Doug.  Harington ,  Quebec.
Thos.  B.  Harris,
Hamilton.
Connecticut,
Howard  B.  Ensign, New  Haven.
E.  G.  Storer,
New  Haven.
Delaware,
Daniel  C.  Godwin,
Dover.
William  S.  Hayes,
Wilmington.
Dist.  Columbia,
Geo.  C.  Whiting,
Washington.
G.  A.  Schwarzman, Washington.
Florida,
D.  C.  Dawkins,
Greenwood.
John  B.  Taylor,
Tallahassee.
Georgia,
Wm.  S.  Rockwell,
Savannah.
Simri  Rose,
Macon.
Illinois,
Ira  A.  W.  Buck,
Aurora.
H.  G.  Reynolds,
Springfield.
Indiana,
A.  C.  Downey,
Rising  Sun.
Francis  King,
Indianapolis.
Iowa,
Thomas  H.  Benton, Council  Bluffs.
T.  S.  Parvin,
Iowa  City.
Kansas,
G.  H.  Fairchild,
Atchison.
C.  Mundee,
Leavenworth.
Kentucky,
Lewis  Landrum,
Stanford.
J.  M.  S.  McCorkle, Greensburg.
Louisiana,
J.  Q.  A.  Fellows,
New  Orleans.
Saml.  G.  Risk,
New  Orleans.
Maine,
J.  H.  Drummond,
Waterville.
Ira  Berry,
Portland.
Maryland,
Anthony  Kimmel,
Frederick.
Joseph  Robinson,
Baltimore.
Massachusetts,
Winslow  Lewis,
Boston.
C.  W.  Moore,
Boston.
Michigan,
Wm.  L.  Greenly,
Adrian.
James  Fenton,
Detroit.
Minnesota,
A.  T.  C.  Pierson,
St.  Paul.
Geo.  W.  Prescott,
St.  Paul.
Mississippi,
David  Mitchell,
Goodman.
Ro.  W.  T.  Daniel,
Jackson.
Missouri,
M.  H.  McFarland,
Louisville.
A.  O'Sullivan,
St.  Louis.
Nebraska,
George  Armstrong,
Omaha.
Robert  W.  Furnas,
Brown  ville.
New  Hampshire ,  Aaron  P.  Hughes,
Nashua.
Horace  Chase,
Hopkinton.
New  Jersey,
Isaac  Van  Wagoner ,  Paterson.
Joseph  H.  Hough,
Trenton.
New  York,
John  W.  Simons,
New  York.
James  M.  Austin,
New  York.
North  Carolina,
Lewis  S.  Williams,
Charlotte.
Wm.  T.  Bain,
Raleigh.
Ohio,
Horace  M.  Stokes,
Lebanon.
John  D.  Caldwell,
Cincinnati.
Oregon,
Amory  Holbrook,
Oregon  City.
T.  McF.  Patton,
Salem.
Pennsylvania,
John  Thomson,
Philadelphia.
William  H.  Adams,
Philadelphia.
Rhode  Island,
William  Gray,
Newport.
Thomas  A.  Doyle,
Providence.
South  Carolina,
B.  Bush  Campbell,
Laurens.
A.  G.  Mackey,
Charleston.
Tennessee,
James  McCallum,
Pulaski.
Charles  A.  Fuller,
Nashville.
Texas,
John  B.  McMahon,
Lockhart.
A.  S.  Ruthven,
Galveston.
Vermont,
Philip  C.  Tucker,
Vergennes.
John  B.  Ilollenbeck. ,  Burlington.
Virginia,
J.  Robin  McDaniel, Lynchburg.
John  Dove,
Richmond.
Washington  Ter. ,  Selucius  Garfielde,
Grand  Mound.
T.  M.  Reed,
Olympia.
Wisconsin,
Gabriel  Bouck,
Oshkosh.
James  B.  Kellogg,
Milwaukee.
29

--- Sayfa 456 ---
444
■world's  masonic  register.
STATISTICAL  TABLE  OF  GRAND  CHAPTERS.
SUBORDINATE
8RAND  CHAP.           CHAPTERS.
MEMBERS.
ORGANIZED.
TIME  OP  MEETING.
PLACE  OF  MEETING.
Alabama,
50
1578
June    2, 5827.
Tues.  af.  1st  Mon.  in  Dec. Montgomery.
Arkansas,
16
479
April  28, 5851.
4th  Thursday  in  October. Little  Rock.
California,
27
1025
May     6, 5854.
Thurs.  b.  2d  Tues.  in  May. Sacramento.
Canada,
18
519
Jan.  20, 5857.
3d  Wed.  in  February.
Movable.
Connecticut,
21
1531
May  17, 5798.
Tues-pre^dWed-inMay.!;,;1;;;;;
Delaware,
3
Jan.    19, 5818.
Mon.  pre.  2d  Tues.  in  Jan. Dover.
Florida,
8
288
Jan.   11, 5847.
2d  Monday  in  January.
Tallahassee.
Georgia,
44
1682
Feb.     4, 5822.
Last  Wednesday  in  April.  Augusta.
Illinois,
61
2033
April   9, 5850.
3  days  b.  1st  Tu.  in  Oct.
Springfield.
Indiana,
43
1534
Nov.,
5846.
May.
Movable.
Iowa,
26
631
June    8, 5854.
Mon.  af.  1st  Tu.  in  June. Movable.
Kentucky,
69
1841
Dec.     4, 5817.
October.
Louisville.
Louisiana,
21
817
May     1, 5848.
2d  Tues.  in  February.
New  Orleans.
Maine,
11
584
June,
5821.
Bef.  1st  Tues.  in  May.
Portland.
Maryland  and
Dist.  Columbia,
}8
437
Nov.  10, 5814.
2d  Mon.  in  November.
Baltimore.
Massachusetts,
•    22
1098
June  12, 5798.
1st  Tues.  in  September.
Boston.
Michigan,
Minnesota,
24
1080
5848.
2d  Mon.  in  January.
Movable.
3
107
Dec.   17, 5859.
Mississippi,
66
2897
May  18, 5846.
3d  Monday  in  January.
Jackson.
Missouri,
26
882
May  18, 5846.
Wed.  b.  4th  Mon.  in  May. St.  Louis.
New  Hampshire.    8
542
5819.
2d  Monday  in  June.
2d  Wed.  in  September.
Concord.
Trenton.
New  Jersey,
12
419
Dec.   30, 5856.
New  York,
89
4152
March,
5798.
1st  Tues.  in  February.
Albany.
North  Carolina
,    30
942
Feb.,
5847.
Ohio,
76
3060
Feb.,
5816.
2d  Week  in  October.
Columbus.
Pennsylvania,
38
1891
Nov.  23, 5795.
3d  Mon.  in  November.
Philadelphia.
Rhode  Island,
5
350
Mar.  13, 5798.
March.
Providence.
South  Carolina
,    19
534
May  29, 5812.
2d  Tues.  in  February.
Charleston.
Tennessee,
44
Texas,
70
2431
5850.
June.
Movable.
Movable.
Richmond.
Vermont,
13
731
5806.
2d  Thurs.  in  August.
Th.  af.  3d  Mon.  in  Deo.
Virginia,
34
1105
May     1, 5808.
Wisconsin,
21
593
Feb.   13, ,  5850.
1st  Wed.  in  February.
Movable.
1026
37,793
Estimating  that  there  are  1207  Royal  Arch  Masons  in  Delaware  and  Tennessee,  that  will
make  the  number  in  the  United  States  and  Canada,  in  good  membership,  39,000.  As  there
are  228,279  Master  Masons  in  actual  membership  in  the  United  States  and  Canada,  as  will  be
seen  by  the  statistical  table  on  page  442,  it  shows  that  the  Royal  Arch  Masons  number  as  one
to  six  Master  Masons.

--- Sayfa 457 ---
GRAND   HIGH   PRIESTS   AND   GRAND   SECRETARIES  OF   GRAND   CHAPTERS.       445
GRAND  HIGH  PRIESTS  AND  GRAND  SECRETARIES  OF  GRAND
CHAPTERS,  AND   THEIR  ADDRESSES.
GRAND  HIGH  PRIEST.
GRAND  SECRETARY.
Alabama,
Arkansas,
California,
Canada,
Connecticut,
Delaware,
Florida,
Georgia,
Illinois,
Indiana,
Iowa,
Kentucky,
Louisiana,
Maine,
Maryland  and   1
Dist.  Columbia,  J
Massachusetts,
Michigan,
Minnesota,
Mississippi,
Missouri,
New  Hampshire,
New  Jersey,
New  York,
North  Carolina,
Ohio,
Pennsylvania,
Rhode  Island,
South  Carolina,
Tennessee,
Texas,
Vermont,
Virginia,
Wisconsin,
S.  A.  M.  Wood,
E.  H.  Whitfield,
H.  Hare  Hartley,
T.  D.  Harington,
F.  J.  Calhoun,
Geo.  W.  Chaytor,
Thos.  T.  Henry,
Philip  T.  Schley,
Nelson  D.  Elwood,
William  Hacker,
Kimbal  Porter,
T.  N.  Wise,
A.  J.  Norwood,
Moses  Dodge,
James  Goszler,
John  McClellan,
Wm.  P.  Innes,
R.  S.  Alden,
M.  S.  Ward,
J.  W.  Crane,
G.H.  Hubbard,  (dep.
Thos.  J.  Corson,
James  M.  Austin,
E.  F.  Watson,
Harvey  Vinal,
Harman  Terkes,
Oliver  Johnson,
A.  G.  Mackey,
Wm.  H.  Whiton,
Wm.  T.  Austin,
James  Evans,
Erastus  Lewis,
Florence.
Camden.
Sacramento.
Quebec.
New  Haven.
Wilmington.
Quincy.
Savannah.
Joliet.
Shelbyville.
Iowa  City.
Covington.
Clinton.
Portland.
Daniel  Sayre,
James  W.  Finley,
L.  C.  Owen,
Thos.  B.  Harris,
E.  G.  Storer,
Daniel  C.  Godwin,
Jno.  B.  Taylor,
B.  B.  Russell,
H.  G.  Reynolds,
Francis  King,
W.  B.  Langridge,
Philip  Swigert,
Samuel  G.  Risk,
Ira  Berry,
Montgomery.
Little  Rock.
San  Francisco.
Hamilton.
New  Haven.
Dover.
Tallahassee.
Augusta.
Springfield.
Indianapolis.
Muscatine.
Frankfort.
New  Orleans.
Portland.
Washington.         Joseph  Robinson,      Baltimore.
Boston.
Grand  Rapids.
St.  Anthony.
Panola.
St.  Louis.
)  Manchester.
Trenton.
New  York.
Graham.
Springfield.
Philadelphia.
Providence.
Charleston.
Columbia.
Galveston.
Richmond.
Janesville.
Thos.  Waterman,
J.  Eastman  Johnson,
A.  T.  C.  Pierson,
Ro.  W.  T.  Daniel,
A.  O'Sullivan,
Horace  Chase,
John  Woolverton,
John  0.  Cole,
Thos.  B.  Carr,
John  D.  Caldwell,
Wm.  H.  Adams,
Thos.  A.  Doyle,
Ebenezer  Thayer,
Chas.  A.  Fuller,
A.  S.  Ruthven,
John  B.  Hollenbeck,
John  Dove,
W.  T.  Palmer,
Boston.
White  Pigeon.
St.  Paul.
Jackson.
St.  Louis.
Hopkinton.
Trenton.
Albany.
Wilmington.
Cincinnati.
Philadelphia.
Providence.
Charleston.
Nashville.
Galveston.
Burlington.
Richmond.
Milwaukee.

--- Sayfa 458 ---
446
world's  masonic  register.
GRAND  COUNCILS.
STATE.
COUNCIL.
MEMBERS.            ORGANIZED.
Alabama,
24
681
June,  5827.
Arkansas,
...
5860.
Connecticut,
17
912
5819.
Florida,
6
150
5858.
Georgia,
15
471
5825.
Illinois,
10
174
5853.
Indiana,
12
386
5856.
Iowa,
5
160
5857.
Kentucky,
24
475
5827.
Louisiana,
4
229
Feb. ,  16,  5856.
Maine,
7
153
5855.
Massachusetts,
6
246
5826.
Michigan,
8
153
5858.
Mississippi,
28
722
5856.
New  Jersey,
4
Nov. 26,  5860.
New  York,
11
412
5807.
North  Carolina,
3
June  6,  5860.
Ohio,
27
773
5829.
Pennsylvania,
15
460
Oct. 26,  5847.
Rhode  Island,
3
80
Oct. 30,  5860.
South  Carolina,
9
Feb. 13,  5860.
Tennessee,
24
400
5847.
Texas,
21
599
5856.
Vermont,
10
457
5854.
Wisconsin,
4
297
8093
5857.
PLACE  OF  MEETING.
TIME  OF  MEETING.
Montgomery.
j-  Hartford  &  New
\     Haven  alt.
Tallahassee.
Augusta.
Springfield.
Indianapolis.
Place  and  time  of
Place  and  time  of
New  Orleans.
Portland.
Boston.
Movable.
Vicksburg.
Trenton.
Movable.
Wilmington.
Movable.
Movable.
Th.  af.  1st  Mon.,  Dec.
|
May.
January.
April.
Last  Thurs.  September.
4th  Monday  in  May.
Grand  Chapter.
Grand  Chapter.
February.
1st  Wednesday  in  May.
2d  Tues.  in  December.
2d  Tues.  in  January.
2d  Mon.  in  January.
3d  Tues.  in  January.
1st  week  in  June.
October.
June.
Charleston.  February.
Nashville.  2d  Mon.  in  October.
Place  Grand  Chapter  meets,  22d  of  June.
  Th.  af.  1st  Wed.  in  Oct.
Movable.  1st  Wed.  in  February.

--- Sayfa 459 ---
GRAND   MASTERS  AND  GRAND   RECORDERS   OP   GRAND   COUNCILS.
447
MOST  PUISSANT  GRAND  MASTERS  AND    GRAND   RECORDERS
OF  GRAND  COUNCILS  OP  ROYAL  AND  SELECT  MASTERS.
GRAND  COUNCIL.
MOST  PUI8SANT  G.  M.
GRAND  RECORDER.
Alabama,
Arkansas,
Connecticut,
Florida,
Georgia,
Illinois,
Indiana,
Iowa,
Kentucky,
Louisiana,
Maine,
Massachusetts,
Michigan,
Mississippi,
New  Jersey,
New  York,
North  Carolina,
Ohio,
Pennsylvania,
Rhode  Island,
South  Carolina,
Tennessee,
Texas,
Vermont,
Wisconsin,
R.  C.  Torrey,
E.  H.  English,
H.  P.  Ensign,
Thomas  Hayward,
Philip  T.  Schley,
Geo.  W.  Deering,
Wm.  Hacker,
Theodore  S.  Parvin,
Philip  Swigert,
J.  H.  Holland,
Abner  B.  Thompson,
E.  B.  Moore,
Frank  Darrow,
Wm.  Cothran,
William  Mead,
N.  0.  Benjamin,
Alexander  Murdoch,
John  M.  Parks,
Alfred  Creigh,
James  Salsbury,
A.  G.  Mackey,
J.  H.  Devereux,
Edward  Clark,
Henry  Ruggles,
A.  Sidney  Wood,
Claiborne.
Little  Rock.
New  Haven.
Tallahassee.
Savannah.
Chicago.
Shelbyville.
Iowa  City.
Frankfort.
New  Orleans.
Brunswick.
Boston.
Pontiac.
Carrollton.
Newark.
New  York.
Salisbury.
Cincinnati.
Washington.
Providence.
Charleston.
Nashville.
Austin.
Poultney.
Madison.
Daniel  Sayre,
E.  G.  Storer,
Jno.  B.  Taylor,
B.  B.  Russell,
H.  G.  Reynolds,
Francis  King,
W.  B.  Langridge,
A.  G.  Hodges,
Samuel  G.  Risk,
Ira  Berry,
George  Butts,
Nathl.  P.  Jacobs,
Ro.  W.  T.  Daniel,
Joseph  H.  Hough,
Josiah  Shove,
R.  T.  Hall,
John  D.  Caldwell,
Thos.  W.  Wright,
John  F.  Driscol,
H.  W.  Schroeder,
Charles  A.  Fuller,
Andrew  Neill,
John  B.  Hollenbeck,
S.  G.  Benedict,
Montgomery.
New  Haven.
Tallahassee.
Augusta.
Springfield.
Indianapolis.
Muscatine.
Frankfort.
New  Orleans.
Portland.
East  Boston.
Detroit.
Jackson.
Trenton.
New  York.
Wadesboro'.
Cincinnati.
Pittsburg.
Warren.
Charleston.
Nashville.
Galveston.
Burlington.
Madison

--- Sayfa 460 ---
448
world's  masonio  register.
GRAND  COMMANDERIES.
G.  COMMANDERIES.
SUBORDINATE.
MEMBERS.
ORGANIZED.
TIME  OF  MEETING.
Alabama,
5
151
1860.
California,
6
204
Aug.  10,  1858.
November.
Connecticut,
6
440
Sept.  13,  1827.
May.
Georgia,
4
207
1860.
April.
Illinois.
9
310
Oct.    27,  1857.
October.
Indiana,
7
212
May   16,  1854.
December.
Kentucky,
4
201
Sept.  17,  1847.
May.
Maine,
4
150
May     5,  1852.
May.
Massachusetts  and  "1
Rhode  Island,     J
9
613
1805.
October.
Michigan,
9
196
April    7,  1857.
June.
Mississippi,
6
216
Jan.   21,  1857.
January.
Missouri,
4
201
May  22,  1860.
May.
New  Hampshire,
5
210
Aug.  22,  1860.
New  Jersey,
3
65
Feb.   14,  1860.
September.
New  York,
25
1373
June  18,  1814.
September.
Ohio,
16
817
Oct.,         1843.
October.
Pennsylvania,
16
558
April  12,  1854.
June.
Tennessee,
4
165
Oct.    12,  1859.
October.
Texas,
6
247
1854.
June.
Vermont,
4
185
Aug.  14,  1851.
January.
Virginia,
10
408
Nov.  27,  1823.
December.
Wisconsin,
3
111
Oct.    20,  1859.
January.
163
7230
SUBORDINATE  COMMANDERIES.
Sub.  Comhanderies.
No.
Members.
Sub.  Comhanderies.
No.
Members,
Arkansas,
1
38
Maryland,
2
75
District  of  Columbia,
1
109
Minnesota,
1
33
Florida,
1
*40
North  Carolina,
1
*40
Iowa,
4
105
Oregon,
1
*40
Louisiana,
3
75
South  Carolina,
1
23
10
367
211
There  are  179  Commanderies  in  the  United  States,  which  have  a  total  of  7808
members,  being  an  average  of  244  Sir  Knights  for  the  32  jurisdictions,  and  nearly
44  for  each  Commandery — rather  an  insignificant  number  for  the  importance  which
Knights  Templar  claim,  or  which  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the  United  States
assumes.
*  Estimated.

--- Sayfa 461 ---
ROYAL   ARCH   CHAPTERS.
The  following  brief  history  will  not  be  unacceptable  to  the  Craft.
The  degrees  now  known  as  the  Chapter  degrees  are  all  modern.  The  Eoyal
Arch  degree,  the  first  of  the  Chapter  degrees,  was  originated .  about  the  year
5738,  in  England,  where  it  always  has  been,  and  is  at  this  time  ike  fourth  degree
in  Masonry ;  and  in  the  United  States,  where  the  degree  was  introduced  soon
after  its  adoption,  it  was  the  fourth  degree  until  near  the  close  of  the  last  cen-
tury, the  degrees  of  Mark  Master,  Past  Master,  and  Most  Excellent  Master
having  previously  no  place  in  the  Masonic  system.  The  Eoyal  Arch  degree,
prior  to  the  formation  of  Grand  Chapters,  was  worked  under  the  authority  of  a
Blue  Lodge  warrant,  permission  being  granted  by  the  Grand  Lodges,  it  being  a
principle  of  Masonry  universally  recognized  and  based  upon  the  soundest  prin-
ciples of  philosophy,  that  in  Symbolic  Masonry,  the  only  branch  of  the  order
then  existing,  and  in  the  Grand  Lodges  was  vested  the  control  and  all  the
powers  of  the  government  of  Masonry,  or,  according  to  the  Constitution  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania,  "  the  Grand  Lodge  is  the  only  true  and  legiti-
mate source  of  Masonic  authority."  In  it,  the  Grand  Lodge,  inhered  the  govern-
ment of  the  entire  system  of  Masonry.  Upon  the  principle  just  stated,  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Pennsylvania,  in  the  year  5795,  authorized  the  formation  of  a
Grand  Chapter  within  its  jurisdiction,  the  first  Grand  Chapter  formed  in  this
country,  yet  subject  to  the  Masonic  control  of  the  Grand  Lodge.
In  the  year  5797,  the  only  Eoyal  Arch  Chapters  in  the  United  States  were
as  follows  : —
There  were  two  Chapters  in  Massachusetts.
six           "
Connecticut.
one          "
Ehode  Island.
thirteen  "
New  York.
one          "
Vermont.
six           "
Pennsylvania.
three        "
Virginia.
five         "
Maryland.
The  Grand  Chapter  of  Pennsylvania  was  formed  on  the  23d  of  November,
5795.  The  Grand  Chapter  of  Virginia  was  formed  May  1st,  5808.  These  two
Grand  Chapters  have  always  been  independent  and  sovereign.
(449)

--- Sayfa 462 ---
450  world's  masonic  eegistee.
GENERAL  GRAND  CHAPTER.
On  the  24th  of  October,  5797,  seven  Companions  representing  three  Chapters,
the  two  in  Massachusetts  and  one  at  Albany,  N.  Y.,  met  at  Boston,  Mass.,  for
the  purpose  of  deliberating  upon  the  propriety  of  forming  a  Grand  Chapter  for
the  States  of  New  Hampshire,  Massachusetts,  Rhode  Island,  Connecticut,  Ver-
mont, and  New  York.  At  this  meeting,  these  seven  Companions  adopted  a  "  cir-
cular letter,"  to  be  sent  to  all  of  the  Chapters  in  the  States  mentioned,  recom-
mending them  to  appoint  one  or  more  delegates  to  meet  at  Hartford,  Conn.,  on
the  fourth  Wednesday  of  January  next  ensuing.  At  this  meeting,  held  on  the  24th
of  January,  5798,  twelve  Companions  were  present,  representing  the  two  Chapters
in  Massachusetts,  the  one  in  Ehode  Island,  three  in  Connecticut,  and  one  at  Hud-
son, N.  Y.  The  records  of  that  day's  meeting  give  us  to  understand  that  the
Companions  in  Connecticut  had,  or  were  about  forming  a  Grand  Chapter  for  that
jurisdiction,  which  caused  the  meeting  some  anxiety,  and  induced  them  to  ap-
point committees  to  confer  with  the  principal  Companions  of  Connecticut  on  the
subject.  A  resolution  was  also  adopted  on  that  day,  that  they  "  will  establish
a  Grand  Royal  Arch  Chapter"  for  the  above-named  States.  The  meeting  ad-
journed until  the  next  day,  at  which  two  more  Chapters  from  New  York  were
represented.  It  appears  from  the  records  of  the  second  day,  that  the  principal
Companions  from  Connecticut  were  at  Hartford,  as  a  committee  was  appointed
to  invite  them  to  attend  and  participate  in  the  Convention.  A  committee  was
also  appointed  on  this  day  "  to  draft  and  report  a  form  of  a  Constitution  for  the
government  of  said  Chapter."  The  Convention  met  again  on  the  following
day,  26th  instant,  and  adopted  a  Constitution,  and  immediately  went  into  an
election.  The  Companion  chosen  as  Grand  High  Priest  of  the  Grand  Chapter
was  one  of  the  Companions  from  Connecticut  who  was  invited  to  attend  the
Convention,  and  the  consequence  was  that  no  independent  Grand  Chapter  was
formed  in  Connecticut.  According  to  one  of  the  provisions  of  the  Constitution,
it  was  required  that  a  "  Deputy  Grand  Chapter  should  be  formed  in  each  of  the
States  which  formed  the  Grand  Chapter."  It  was  also  provided  in  the  Consti-
tution that  the  first  meeting  of  the  Grand  Chapter  should  be  held  in  the  City  of
Middletowh,  Conn.,  on  the  third  Wednesday  of  September  next,  and  afterward
once  in  every  two  years.  The  Grand  Chapter  was  to  be  styled  "  The  Grand
Royal  Arch  Chapter  of  the  Northern  States  of  America."  The  Constitution
also  prescribed  the  time  of  meeting  of  the  Deputy  Grand  Chapters  of  Massa-
chusetts and  Rhode  Island,  which  formed  one  body,  and  Connecticut  and  New
York.  As  there  was  but  one  Chapter  in  Vermont  and  none  in  New  Hampshire,
the  Grand  Chapter  reserved  to  itself  the  "  sole  power  of  granting  charters  for
opening  Chapters  within  the  said  States."
The  first  meeting  of  the  Grand  Chapter  of  the  Northern  States  of  America,
after  its  organization,  was  held,  agreeably  to  the  Constitution,  in  the  City  of
Middletown,  Conn.,  on  the  third  Wednesday  of  September,  5798.  The  follow-
ing, which  we  copy  from  the  record,  will  show  the  warm  zeal  and  interest  taken
by  the  Companions  in  this  newly  organized  body:  "Present,  Companions
William  Woart,  General  Grand  Secretary ;  Rev.  Abraham  L.  Clarke,  General

--- Sayfa 463 ---
GENERAL  GRAND  CHAPTER.  451
Grand  Chaplain;  Excellent  Benj.  Hurd,  Jr.,  General  Grand  King,  was  repre-
sented by  Companion  Henry  Fowle,  of  St.  Andrew's  Chapter,  Massachusetts,
his  proxy ;  Excellent  James  Harrison,  Deputy  Grand  Scribe,  Massachusetts,
represented  by  Companion  Samuel  Billings,  his  proxy  ;  Excellent  Seth  Wheaton,
Deputy  Grand  High  Priest,  Excellent  Gershom  Jones,  Deputy  Grand  King,
and  Samuel  Eddy,  Deputy  Grand  Scribe,  Deputy  Grand  Chapter,  Rhode  Island,
were  represented  by  Excellent  Companion  Rev.  Abraham  L.  Clarke,  their  proxy."
The  Grand  Chaplain  and  the  Grand  Secretary  were  the  only  two  Officers  of  the
Grand  Chapter  present  at  this  first  meeting,  and,  including  i\em,  five  Companions
in  all,  and  the  record  has  General  prefixed  to  the  office  of  these  two  Grand  Offi-
cers. These  five  Companions  went  into  an  election  for  Grand  Officers,  or,  as  the
record  states,  "  the  Grand  Chapter  proceeded  to  the  choice  of  Officers,  when,  on
sorting  and  counting  the  votes,  the  old  Officers  were  all  declared  re-elected."  A
resolution  was  adopted  "  That  this  meeting  be,  and  the  same  hereby  is  adjourned
to  the  second  "Wednesday  of  January  next,  then  to  meet  at  Providence,  in  the
State  of  Rhode  Island."
A  meeting  was  held  accordingly  at  Providence,  R.  I.,  on  the  9th  of  January,
5799,  which,  although  termed  a  "  regular  meeting,"  was  unquestionably  irregu-
lar, as  the  meetings,  according  to  the  Constitution  adopted  September,  5798,
were  to  be  biennial.  At  this  meeting  eight  Companions  in  all  were  present,
from  Massachusetts,  Rhode  Island,  and  New  York,  who  continued  their  sittings
during  two  days.  They  adopted  "  Rules  of  Order"  and  a  new  "Constitution."
This  Constitution  ignored  in  toto  the  Constitution  adopted  January  26th,  5798,
in  not  only  making  the  meetings  septennial  from  that  time,  but  other  radical
changes  were  made ;  and  providing  for  an  immediate  election  of  officers  before
the  term  of  those  elected  in  5798  had  expired.  This  Constitution  gave  the
body  the  title  of  "General  Grand  Chapter  for  the  six  Northern  States  of
America,"  and  prefixes  "General"  to  the  title  of  the  Grand  Officers.  The
Deputy  Grand  Chapters  were  changed  to  State  Grand  Chapters.  An  election
for  officers  was  also  held  as  provided  in  the  new  Constitution.
It  will  be  noticed  that  there  was  but  one  Chapter  in  Vermont  and  one  in
Rhode  Island,  yet  the  Constitution  placed  the  State  of  Vermont  under  the
jurisdiction  of  New  York,  until  there  were  a  sufficient  number  of  subordinates
to  form  a  State  Grand  Chapter ;  and  yet  the  one  Chapter  in  Rhode  Island
formed  a  State  Grand  Chapter  within  itself.  It  will  also  be  remembered  that
the  jurisdiction  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  was  confined  to  the  Six  Northern
States.
On  the  4th  of  January,  5804,  the  Grand  Chapter  of  Rhode  Island  adopted  a
preamble  and  several  resolutions  and  »  circular,  letter,  which  were  sent  to  the
several  State  Grand  Chapters,  the  import  of  which  were,  that  an  application
had  been  made  to  the  Grand  Chapter  for  the  institution  of  a  Chapter  of  Royal
Arch  Masons  in  one  of  the  Southern  States,  and  that  as  they  had  no  jurisdiction,
they  proposed  that  competent  authority  be  vested  in  the  three  principal  officers
of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  or  any  two  of  them,  to  institute  Chapters  in  any
State  in  which  there  was  no  Grand  Chapter.  The  record  of  the  septennial
meeting  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter,  held  at  Middletown,  January  9th,  5806,
shows  that  the  Grand  King  and  Scribe,  acting  upon  the  resolutions  and  circular
letter  of  the  Companions  of  Rhode  Island,  did,  in  violation  of  the  Constitution,

--- Sayfa 464 ---
452  world's  masonic  register.
institute  a  Chapter  at  Beaufort,  South  Carolina,  and  another  at  Savannah,
Georgia ;  and  this  they  did,  as  they  stated,  "by  virtue  of  authority  derived  from
a  special  decree  of  several  of  the  Grand  Chapters,"  and  the  General  Grand
Chapter  approved  of  their  proceedings.  At  this  septennial  meeting  it  was
resolved  that  the  next  septennial  meeting  be  held  in  the  City  of  New  York,
on  the  second  Thursday  in  September,  1812.  An  election  for  officers  was  held,
and  the  Constitution  was  again  altered.  The  title  of  this  body  was  now  changed
to  "The  General  Grand  Chapter  of  Eoyal  Arch  Masons  for  the  United  States
of  America.''  There  was  no  meeting  of  this  body  from  the  septennial  meeting
in  5806  until  5816.
On  the  6th  of  June,  5816,  the  General  Grand  Chapter  assembled  in  the  City
of  New  York.  There  were  fourteen  Companions  present.  At  this  meeting  a
change  in  the  1st  Section  of  1st  Article  of  the  Constitution  was  made.  The
Grand  Chapter  of  Maryland  and  District  of  Columbia  was  admitted  into  the
confederacy  at  this  meeting,  but  with  a  stipulation  that  it  should  "  not  be  forced
to  alter  its  mode  of  working,"  which,  "  under  a  consideration  of  all  the  circum-
stances," the  General  Grand  Chapter  agreed  to.  The  General  Grand  Chapter
since  that  period  has  extended  its  jurisdiction  into  most  of  the  States  and
Territories  in  the  United  States,  with  the  exceptions  of  Pennsylvania,  Virginia,
Delaware,  and  Florida,  in  which  States  the  Grand  Chapters  never  acknowledged
allegiance  to  a  superior  body ;  and  Kentucky  and  North  Carolina,  in  which
States  the  Grand  Chapters  which  were  formerly  subordinate  to  the  General
Grand  Chapter,  within  the  last  three  years  severed  their  connection  with  it  and
are  now  independent  Grand  Chapters.
The  Grand  Chapters  in  the  following  States  are  subordinate  to  the  General
Grand  Chapter,  viz. :  Alabama,  Arkansas,  California,  Connecticut,  Georgia,
Illinois,  Indiana,  Iowa,  Louisiana,  Maine,  Maryland  and  District  of  Columbia,
Massachusetts,  Michigan,  Minnesota,  Mississippi,  Missouri,  New  Hampshire,
New  Jersey,  New  York,  Ohio,  Ehode  Island,  South  Carolina,  Tennessee,  Texas,
Vermont,  Wisconsin.
OFFICERS  OF  THE  GENERAL  GRAND  CHAPTER.
Elected  September  16,  5859.
Albert  G.  Macket,  Charleston,  S.  C,  M.  E.  G.  G.  High  Priest.
John  L.  Lewis,  Jr.,  Penn  Yan,  N.  Y.,  M.  E.  D'y  G.  G.  High  Priest.
Ira  A.  W.  Buck,  Aurora,  111.,  M.  E.  G.  G.  King.
Giles  M.  Hillyer,  Natchez,  Miss.,  M.  E.  G.  G.  Scribe.
James  Penn,  Memphis,  Tenn.,  G.  G.  Treasurer.
Samuel  G.  Risk,  New  Orleans,  La.,  G.  G.  Secretary.
John  McClellan,  Boston,  Mass.,  G.  G.  Captain  of  the  Host.
William  Hacker,  Shelbyville,  Ind.,  G.  G.  Eoyal  Arch  Captain.
Next  Triennial  Meeting  of  the  General  Grand  Chapter  will  be  held  at  Mem-
phis, Tennessee,  on  the  second  Tuesday  (being  the  10th  day)  of  September,
5862.

--- Sayfa 465 ---
GRAND  ENCAMPMENT  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES.
The  history  of  the  formation  of  the  body  at  present  known  as  the  Grand
Encampment  of  the  United  States  is  as  follows  : —
In  the  year  1797  there  were  six  Encampments  in  the  United  States ;  four  in
Pennsylvania  and  two  in  New  York,  one  in  the  City  of  New  York  and  the
other  at  Stillwater.  On  the  19th  of  May,  1797,  a  Grand  Encampment  was
formed  in  Pennsylvania.  In  1802  there  were  two  additional  Encampments  in
New  York,  one  in  the  City  of  New  York,  the  other  at  Albany ;  and  one  in  the
State  of  Rhode  Island,  at  Providence.  In  1805  there  were,  in  addition  to  the
above,  two  Encampments  in  Massachusetts,  and  three  in  Maryland.  The  fol-
lowing list  comprises,  we  believe,  all  the  Encampments  of  Knights  Templar
existing  in  the  United  States  in  1805 : —
Pennsylvania.
Encampment,  No.  1    Philadelphia.
Encampment,  No    Philadelphia.
Encampment,  No    Harrisburg.
Encampment,  No    Carlisle.
New  York.
The  Old  Encampment  ....  City  of  New  York.
Montgomery  Encampment   ....  Stillwater.
Jerusalem  Encampment        ....  City  of  New  York.
Temple  Encampment    Albany.
Rhode  Island.
St.  John's  Encampment       ....    Providence.
Massachusetts.
Encampment         ......    Boston.
Encampment
Newburyport.
Maryland.
Encampment,  No.    3    .        .        .        .        .     Baltimore.
Encampment,  No.  13
Baltimore.
Encampment,  No.  24
Havre  de  Grace.
(453)

--- Sayfa 466 ---
454  world's  masonic  register.
The  Encampment  at  Providence,  Bhode  Island,  held  a  Convention  in  that
city,  on  the  6th  of  May,  1805,  when  measures  were  proposed,  and  adopted,  for
the  formation  of  a  Grand  Encampment,  and  a  Committee  appointed  "  to  devise
and  report  a  form  of  Constitution  explanatory  of  the  principles  upon  which  a
Grand  Encampment  shall  be  opened."  This  Convention  adjourned  to  meet
ao-ain  on  the  13th  instant,  at  which  time  the  Committee  reported  a  Constitution,
which  being  read  and  amended,  was  unanimously  adopted,  and  the  Grand  En-
campment formed,  and  an  election  for  Grand  Officers  had.  Thomas  Smith
Webb  was  elected  Grand  Master.  The  title  of  the  Constitution  was,  Constitu-
tion op  the  Grand  Encampment  op  Rhode  Island  and  Jurisdiction  there-
unto belonging.  The  Constitution  contained  eleven  articles,  the  first  of  which
gave  to  the  Grand  Encampment  the  above  title.  It  provided  that  the  meetings
were  to  be  held  annually.
At  the  annual  meeting,  in  May,  1807,  the  Grand  Encampment  deemed  it  ex-
pedient to  extend  its  jurisdiction  to  any  State  or  Territory  where  there  was  no
Grand  Encampment,  and  altered  and  amended  its  Constitution  accordingly.
The  title  given  to  the  Constitution  was  Constitution  of  the  United  States
Grand  Encampment  of  Knights  Templars  and  Appendant  Orders.  It  was
divided  into  two  articles,  the  first  containing  nine  sections,  the  other  seven.  It
provided  that  the  Grand  Encampment  should  meet  annually,  and  extended  its
jurisdiction  "  to  any  State  or  Territory  where  there  is  not  a  Grand  Encampment
established."
There  is  no  doubt  that  this  was  the  original  establishment  of  the  Grand  En-
campment of  the  United  States.  We  have  no  records  of  the  United  States
Grand  Encampment  from  May,  1807,  until  1816.
"  At  an  Assembly  of  this  Grand  Encampment,  holden  in  Boston,  in  the  month
of  May,  1816,  it  was  resolved  that  three  delegates  be  appointed  on  the  part  of
this  Grand  Encampment,  to  meet  a  General  Grand  Convention,  to  be  holden  in
the  City  of  Philadelphia,  or  the  City  of  New  York,  in  the  month  of  June,  a.d.
1816,  for  the  purpose  of  forming  a  General  Grand  Encampment  of  Knights
Templars  for  the  United  States,  and  a  Constitution  for  the  government  of  the
same ;  and  the  M.  E.  Thomas  Smith  "Webb,  M.  E.  Henry  Fowle,  and  M.  E.
John  Snow,  were  appointed  accordingly.
"  The  Delegates  proceeded  to  the  City  of  New  York,  where  a  Convention
assembled,  consisting  of  the  representatives  of  nine  Encampments  and  Councils."
These  extracts  we  copy  from  the  1818  edition  of  Webb's  Monitor,  and  as
Webb  was  the  Grand  Master  of  the  United  States  Grand  Encampment,  and  the
moving  spirit  in  the  Convention  at  New  York,  his  statement,  as  published,  may
be  considered  as  correct.  The  United  States  Grand  Encampment  was  evi-
dently formed  of  the  Encampments  only  in  Ehode  Island  at  that  time,  which
were  two  in  number,  the  one  at  Providence,  already  mentioned,  and  one  recently
organized  at  Newport.  Webb  continues :  "  The  Convention,  after  mature  de-
liberation, formed  and  adopted  a  Constitution,  and  opened  a  General  Grand
Encampment  of  Knights  Templars  and  the  Appendant  Orders  for  the  United
States."
In  addition  to  the  above-named  Encampments,  a  Council  of  K.  E.  C.  had
been  formed  at  Portland,  Maine.
Webb  states  that  the  delegates  of  nine  Encampments  and  Councils  met  in

--- Sayfa 467 ---
GRAND   ENCAMPMENT   OF  THE   TJNITED   STATES.  455
Convention  at  New  York.  M.  E.  William  B.  Hubbard,  in  an  address  before
the  Grand  Encampment  of  Ohio,  in  December,  1857,  stated  that  he  copied  from
"  the  original  minutes,"  and  enumerates  only  eight,  as  follows  : —
"  Boston  Encampment,  Boston.
St.  John's  Encampment,  Providence.
Ancient  Encampment,  New  York.
Temple  Encampment,  Albany.
Montgomery  Encampment,  Stillwater.
St.  Paul's  Encampment,  Newburyport.
Newport  Encampment,  Newport.
Darius  Encampment,  Portland."
Jerusalem  Encampment,  in  New  York,  is  omitted  in  the  list  of  M.  E.  Hub-
bard, and  if  he  is  right,  Webb  is  wrong  in  stating  that  nine  Encampments  were
represented.  The  Encampments  in  Pennsylvania  and  Maryland,  and  an  En-
campment which  had  been  formed  in  Delaware,  were  not  represented  in  the
Convention.
It  is  singular  that  Philadelphia  should  have  been  mentioned  as  one  of  the
places  for  the  General  Grand  Convention  to  be  holden  in,  in  June,  1816,  by  the
United  States  Grand  Encampment,  which  met  in  Boston  in  May,  181 6.
It  appears  from  the  records  of  1814,  that  the  Grand  Encampment  of  Penn-
sylvania had  taken  the  initiative  to  "  extend  its  jurisdiction,"  as,  at  a  Grand
Convention  of  Knights  Templar,  convened  in  Philadelphia  on  the  15th  of
February,  1814,  there  were  present  representatives  from  Philadelphia,  an  En-
campment at  Pittsburg,  Eising  Sun  Encampment,  City  of  New  York,  and  from
the  Encampment  at  Wilmington,  Delaware,  and  Encampment,  No.  1,  Baltimore,
Maryland.  The  Convention  formed  a  Grand  Encampment  for  Pennsylvania,
adopted  a  Constitution,  and  elected  the  following  officers : —
M.  E.  William  McCorkxe,  of  Philadelphia,  General  Grand  Master.
M.  E.  Archibald  Hamilton,  of  Wilmington,  Del.,  Grand  Generalissimo.
M.  E.  Peter  Dobb,  of  New  York,  Grand  Captain-General.
B.  E.  Henry  S.  Keatinge,  of  Baltimore,  Md.,  Grand  Standard  Bearer.
B.  E.  John  Sellers,  of  Wilmington,  Del.,  Grand  Chancellor.
R.  E.  George  A.  Baker,  of  Philadelphia,  Grand  Recorder.
R.  E.  Nathaniel  Delhorn,  of  Philadelphia,  Grand  Treasurer.
R.  E.  James  Humes,  of  Philadelphia,  Grand  Sword  Bearer.
The  officers  were  installed  by  Sir  Knight  James  McDonald,  of  New  York.
The  formation  of  this  Grand  Encampment,  consisting  of  subordinate  Encamp-
ments from  New  York,  Maryland,  Delaware,  and  Pennsylvania,  may  have  been
the  reason  why  Philadelphia  was  named,  by  the  United  States  Grand  Encamp-
ment of  Boston,  as  one  of  the  places  for  the  holding  of  the  Convention  in  June,
1816,  and  also  for  forming  a  "General  Grand  Encampment."  The  United
States  Grand  Encampment  formed  in  Rhode  Island,  although  its  jurisdiction  by
its  constitution  extended  to  every  State  and  Territory  where  there  was  no  Grand
Encampment,  yet  it  was  composed  only  of  the  Encampments  in  that  State,  un-
less some  of  the  Encampments  in  New  York  or  Massachusetts  were  formed  by
its  authority,  which  hardly  seems  probable;  whereas,  at  the  Convention  in  New

--- Sayfa 468 ---
456
WORLD'S   MASONIC  REGISTER.
York,  in  June,  1816,  in  changing  its  title  to  "  General  Grand  Encampment,"  it
received  into  its  folds  the  Encampments  represented  in  New  York  and  Massa-
chusetts. It  would  appear  as  if  this  movement  was  taken  in  order  to  prevent
the  extension  of  the  Pennsylvania  Grand  Encampment,  in  which  it  succeeded  so
well  that  it  survived  but  a  short  period,  and  finally,  at  a  very  recent  date,  sub-
ordinate Encampments  were  instituted,  and  a  Grand  Encampment  formed  in
Pennsylvania  by  its  authority,  and  the  old  Encampments  also  affiliated  with  the
Grand  Encampment  under  the  jurisdiction  of  and  subordinate  to  the  General
Grand  Encampment.
On  the  29th  of  November,  1860,  we  addressed  a  letter  to  M.  E.  B.  B.  French,
present  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the  United  States,  inquir-
ing "  if  the  General  Grand  Encampment  held  any  meetings  between  the  years
1807  and  1816,"  to  which  he,  with  his  accustomed  promptness,  replied,  under
date  of  December  1st,  1860,  as  follows  :  "  The  regular  records  of  the  Grand  En-
campment of  the  United  States  show  the  first  organization  of  that  body  on  the
20th  and  21st  of  June,  1816.  There  was  some  attempt  to  form  a  Grand  En-
campment prior  to  that  time,  as  I  have  been  told.  I  have  never  seen  any
record  of  it.  From  1816  up,  the  meetings  have  been  very  regular.  The  first
were  triennial,  viz.:  First,  1816;  and  second,  September,  1819.  Then  septen-
nial: Third,  September,  1826.  Then  again  triennial:  Fourth,  September,
1829 ;  fifth,  1832 ;  and  thence  onward  triennial  up  to  the  last,  fourteenth,  at
Chicago,  September,  1859."
Notwithstanding  the  records  of  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the  United  States
"  show  the  first  organization  of  that  body  on  the  20th  and  21st  of  June,  1816,"
it  was  nothing  more  nor  less  than  a  continuation  of  the  Rhode  Island  "  United
States  Grand  Encampment,"  without  any  enlargement  of  its  jurisdiction,  only
changing  the  title  of  the  body.
OFFICERS    OF   GRAND   ENCAMPMENT   OF   KNIGHTS
TEMPLAR  OF  THE  UNITED  STATES.
Elected  September,  1859.
Hon.  Benj.  B.  French,
David  S.  Goodloe,
Winslow  Lewis,  M.D.,
James  V.  Z.  Blaney,
Charles  Marsh,
AZARIAH  T.  C.  PlERSON,
John  W.  Simons,
Samuel  G.  Bisk,
Abner  B.  Thompson,
Robert  M.  Henderson,
Nathaniel  P.  Jacobs,
Washington,  D.  C,
M.  E.
Lexington,  Ky.,
R.  E.
Boston,  Mass.,
V.  E.
Chicago,  111.,
V.  E.
Nevada,  Cal.,
V.  E.
St.  Paul,  Minn.,
V.  E.
New  York,  N.  Y.,
V.  E.
New  Orleans,  La.,
V.  E.
Brunswick,  Me.,
V.  E.
Lexington,  Mo.,
V.  E.
Detroit,  Mich.,
V.  E.
Grand  Master.
Deputy  Grand  Master.
Grand  Generalissimo.
Grand  Captain-General.
Grand  Senior  Warden.
Grand  Junior  Warden.
Grand  Treasurer.
Grand  Recorder.
Grand  Standard  Bearer.
Grand  Sword  Bearer.
Grand  Warden.
The  next  Triennial  Meeting  of  the  Grand  Encampment  of  the  United  States
will  be  held  on  the  first  Tuesday  in  September,  1862,  at  Memphis,  Tennessee.

--- Sayfa 469 ---
FUNDAMENTAL   PRINCIPLES.  451
FUNDAMENTAL  PRINCIPLES.
Freemasonry  is  a  universal  institution,  because  it  is  not  confined  to  any
particular  nation  or  people.  There  is  no  North,  no  South,  no  East,  nor  West
in  Masonry.  It  is  not  bounded  by  geographical  landmarks.  Freemasonry  is
universal  because  it  embraces  within  its  folds  the  people  of  every  religion  aDd
government.  It  does  not  recognize  the  political  or  religious  elements  of  society.
In  thus  far  Freemasonry  is  universal  as  the  love  of  the  Creator,  whose  variegated
mantle  is  spread  high  over  all  the  beings  made  in  His  image.  Freemasonry  has
its  conditions,  which  constitute  the  qualifications  those  must  possess  who  wish  to
become  Freemasons.  These  are,  a  belief  in  God,  the  Creator  of  the  universe,  a
life  of  virtue  and  goodness,  an  unimpaired  intellect,  to  be  men  possessing  a
sound  physical  organization,  to  be  of  mature  and  discreet  age,  and  free  born.
These  qualifications  Freemasonry  requires  those  to  possess  who  are  admitted
into  its  mysteries.  In  its  universal  character  it  cannot  inquire  into  the  birth-
place, religion,  or  politics  of  applicants.  As  to  the  birthplace,  all  men  are  the
children  of  the  one  Father;  as  to  religion,  each  man  is  free  to  choose  the  path
which  he  believes  will  bring  him  nearest  God ;  as  to  politics,  Freemasonry
enjoins  obedience  to  the  civil  powers  in  every  country  where  Freemasons  reside.
The  conditions  or  qualifications  may  be  thus  stated :  A  belief  in  a  Supreme
Being,  who  created  and  governs  all  worlds,  is  a  belief  common  to  all  intelligent
beings;  therefore  no  atheist  can  be  made  a  Freemason.  A  life  of  virtue  and
goodness — a  man  must  be  a  "good  and  true  man  ;"  the  "irreligious  libertine,
immoral  or  scandalous  men"  cannot  be  admitted  members  of  the  Masonic  Order.
An  unimpaired  intellect — mental  imbecility  disqualifies  a  man  to  observe  the
beneficent  principles  of  the  institution,  or  to  preserve  its  secrets.  To  be  men
possessing  a  sound  physical  organization— no  woman  can  be  made  a  Mason —
and  to  perform  the  work,  to  teach  and  be  taught,  a  man  must  be  hale  and
sound.  To  be  of  mature  and  discreet  age — a  Mason  must  act  as  becomes  a
moral  and  a  wise  man.  To  be  free  born — no  bondman,  those  who  are  restrained
of  their  liberty  cannot  if  summoned,  or  when  called  to  go  out  of  their  way  to
benefit  a  brother,  comply  with  the  requisites  of  Freemasonry ;  such  are  therefore
denied  being  received  into  membership  in  the  fraternity.
The  great  aim  of  Freemasonry  is  the  establishment  of  a  universal  brotherhood ;
therefore  it  cannot  confine  its  privileges  to  any  nation,  country,  people,  or  creed  ;
this  universality,  and  the  qualifications  which  those  must  possess  who  are
admitted  within  its  sanctuaries,  form  the  basis  upon  which  the  institution  is
founded.  As  it  at  present  exists — and  Freemasonry  is  established  in  every
country  on  the  wide  earth — a  person  desirous  of  becoming  a  Freemason  must
make  application  through  one  who  is  a  Mason  ;  he  must  do  so  unsolicited,  and
of  his  own  free  will.  He  must  have  no  mercenary  object,  but  his  sole  motive
must  be  a  desire  for  knowledge,  and  to  promote  the  welfare  of  society,  which  is

--- Sayfa 470 ---
458  world's  masonic  register.
the  end  and  aim  of  the  institution.  The  application  must  have  two  recom-
menders,  and  it  must  be  read  in  the  open  Lodge,  and  referred  to  a  committee  of
investigation.  This  committee  must  consist  of  three,  all  Master  Masons,  neither
of  whom  were  the  recommenders.  It  is  the  duty  of  this  committee  to  satisfy
themselves,  by  personal  investigations,  that  the  applicant  possesses  the  qualifi-
cations which  Freemasonry  requires.  The  importance  of  this  duty  cannot  be
over-estimated.  It  is,  next  to  the  ballot,  the  safeguard  of  the  institution.  If
the  committee  are  satisfied  that  the  applicant  is  worthy,  their  report  will  be
favorable ;  if  they  find,  upon  due  inquiry,  that  he  is  not  worthy  of  being  received
into  our  fraternity,  they  must  report  accordingly.  This  duty  no  committee
should  fail  in  performing.  There  should  be  no  equivocation  in  their  report,  no
disguise  or  concealment,  but  the  plain,  naked  truth  should  be  stated,  according
to  the  best  information  which  a  diligent  investigation  elicited.  The  inquiry  into
the  character  of  an  applicant  is  a  duty  that  no  member  of  the  Lodge  can  be
exempt  from ;  each  and  every  one  must  be  satisfied  of  the  applicant's  worthiness.
A  committe  is  appointed  merely  for  convenience,  and  the  better  regulation  of
the  business  of  the  Lodge.  If  the  ballot  is  unanimous  in  favor  of  the  applicant
he  is  elected  not  only  a  member  of  the  Lodge,  but  is  entitled  to  receive  the
degrees  of  Masonry.  In  some  States  a  ballot  is  taken  for  every  degree,  but  in
the  older  jurisdictions  only  one  ballot  is  had.  It  must,  however,  be  understood
that  if  there  are  objections  against  an  applicant,  even  after  a  unanimous  ballot,
he  cannot  be  initiated  until  the  objections  are  removed ;  or  if  after  he  is  initiated,
he  cannot  be  advanced.  If  there  is  more  than  one  black  ball  against  the  candi-
date he  should  be  rejected,  and  his  case  considered  as  disposed  of.  If  there  is
only  one  black  ball,  the  Master  should  not  declare  the  candidate  rejected,  but
order  the  ballot  to  be  taken  a  second  time,  in  order  to  rectify  a  mistake,  if  one
was  made.  If  on  the  second  ballot  a  black  ball  is  again  cast,  the  candidate
must  be  declared  rejected.  In  almost  every  jurisdiction  the  rejection  of  a  can-
didate is  final  for  the  time  being,  but  he  can  apply  again  after  a  lapse  of  time,
in  most  cases  a  twelvemonth,  and  the  popular  opinion  or  usage  is  against  the
reconsideration  of  the  ballot.  In  Pennsylvania,  however,  the  usage  is  different.
If  an  applicant  is  rejected,  a  reconsideration  of  the  ballot,  on  the  same  evening,
may  be  moved,  which  is  put  on  the  record.  On  the  next  regular  meeting  the
reconsideration  is  a  proper  subject  of  discussion,  and  if  a  majority  of  the  mem-
bers are  in  favor  of  the  reconsideration,  the  applicant  may  be  balloted  for  at  the
next  or  some  subsequent  meeting.  If  the  ballot  is  all  clear,  he  is  elected;  if  not,
he  is  rejected,  and  at  no  future  time  can  the  application  be  renewed  without
the  consent  of  the  Grand  Lodge.  The  ballot,  however,  in  all  cases  must  be
unanimous  before  a  candidate  can  be  elected  or  receive  the  degrees  of  Masonry.
The  ballot  is  a  sacred  right  which  no  Mason  can  be  deprived  of,  or  the  right
impaired,  if  in  good  standing,  of  course,  by  any  proceedings  or  legislation  what-
ever. The  ballot  must  be  secret.  No  Freemason  has  a  right  to  say  how  he
voted,  or  to  intimate  it  in  any  manner  so  that  it  may  be  known;  and  on  the
other  hand,  no  power  can  rightly  compel  him  to  disclose  how  he  voted.  A  mis-
taken notion  has  somehow  obtained  in  some  places,  that  a  brother  who  votes  a
black  ball  is  bound  to  give  his  reasons  to  the  Master.  This  doctrine  is  taught
by  some  authors,  and  it  is  known  that  much  confusion  has  resulted  in  conse-
quence of  such  erroneous  teachings.

--- Sayfa 471 ---
FUNDAMENTAL   PRINCIPLES.  459
The  petition  of  an  applicant  must  lie  over  one  month.  A  petition  can  only
be  received  at  a  regular  meeting,  and  balloting  for  candidates  can  only  be  held
at  regular  meetings — that  is,  the  stated  monthly  meetings — and  there  must  be
an  interval  of  one  full  month  between  the  conferring  of  the  degrees.
In  Masonry  no  private  matters  of  business  or  otherwise,  no  personal  differ-
ences, no  objections  of  religion  or  politics,  constitute  valid  grounds  for  deposit-
ing a  black  ball.  To  do  so  would  be  wrong,  as  it  would  be  wrong  not  to  vote  a
black  ball,  or  not  to  vote  at  all,  where  it  was  known  that  the  applicant  was
guilty  of  crime,  or  unworthy  to  be  initiated  into  the  secrets  of  Masonry.  A
Mason  ought  never  to  shrink  from  the  performance  of  a  duty.  A  Mason  should
not  be  influenced  to  vote  for  an  applicant  because  of  friendship  or  association.
His  highest  duty  is  to  the  institution.  Neither  should  he  recommend  the  peti-
tion of  any  one  unless  fully  satisfied  that  the  applicant  is  every  way  worthy,  and
will  fully  conform  to  the  precepts  and  established  usages  of  the  Order.
The  antecedents,  circumstances,  and  social  habits  of  the  applicants  are  legiti-
mate subjects  for  committees  of  investigation  to  inquire  into.  Religion,  politics,
and  nationality  are  not  proper  subjects,  and  such  inquiries  are  not  only  improper,
but  are  contrary  to  and  in  violation  of  the  spirit  and  principles  of  Freemasonry.
The  inquiry  into  the  circumstances  of  applicants  ought  only  to  extend  so  far  as
that  the  initiation  fee  and  monthly  contributions  will  not  subject  the  petitioner
to  inconvenience,  or  cause  him  to  deprive  his  family  of  their  accustomed  com-
forts.
An  applicant  for  the  mysteries  of  Freemasonry  must  believe  in  a  Supreme
Being,  the  Creator  of  all  worlds ;  he  must  be  a  freeman,  of  mature  age,  of  sound
body  and  mind,  and  possess  correct  moral  principles,  and  be  capable  of  appre-
ciating the  sublime  morality  of  the  institution,  and  be  of  a  benevolent,  humane,
and  charitable  disposition.  Immoral  men,  those  physically  deformed  or  imbecile
in  mind,  are  disqualified  by  the  laws  of  Masonry  from  being  admitted  into  the
membership  of  the  fraternity.
Freemasonry  is  a  system  of  order,  governed  by  laws  having  for  their  basis
certain  "landmarks,"  which  are  found,  in  the  necessities  of  man,  to  promote  his
social  happiness,  to  elevate  and  improve  him  intellectually  and  spiritually.
These  laws,  to  be  beneficial  and  useful,  must  be  strictly  observed  and  adhered
to.  Every  Lodge,  in  addition  to  the  ancient  landmarks,  is  also  governed  by  the
Constitution,  rules  and  regulations  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  which  is  the  legislative-
governing  body  of  the  jurisdiction;  also,  by  a  code  of  By-Laws,  framed  in
accordance  with  the  above,  for  its  own  internal  government.  The  Constitutions
of  the  several  Grand  Lodges  differ;  therefore  Masons  must  be  governed  by  the
local  laws  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  jurisdiction  where  they  reside.
The  principles  of  Freemasonry  comprehend  the  entire  code  of  the  moral  law.
To  be  a  Mason  is  to  be  a  good  man.  A  good  man  will  be  an  observer  of
law.  The  principles  of  Freemasonry,  the  ancient  landmarks,  the  Constitutions
and  Laws  of  Grand  Lodges,  and  the  By-Laws  of  subordinate  Lodges,  all  ought
to  blend  harmoniously  together,  and  in  no  part  contradict  each  other  or  come
into  conflict.  The  By-Laws  of  Lodges  ought  to  be  simplified,  and  only  contain
such  provisions  as  are  necessary  to  systematize  the  working  of  the  Lodge.
Every  By-Law  should  be  faithfully  lived  up  to.  The  time  of  meeting  specified
is  as  necessary  to  be  observed  as  the  particular  stated  night.    Minutes  and
30

--- Sayfa 472 ---
460  world's  masonic  register.
parts  of  hours  are  of  importance  to  the  man  of  well  regulated  mind ;  and  who
better  than  Masons  understand  the  value  of  time  ?  The  officers  especially  of  a
Lodge,  as  well  as  its  members,  ought  to  be  at  the  Lodge-room,  so  as  to  open  the
Lodge  precisely  at  the  time  stated  in  the  By-Laws.  Indifference  to  a  particular
observance  of  any  one  law  ought  not  to  exist  in  any  of  the  officers  or  the  mem-
bership. The  Master  is  bound  not  only  to  observe  the  laws  of  his  Lodge  him-
self, but  strictly  to  enforce  them  also ;  and  the  more  rigid  the  letter  of  the  law
is  adhered  to,  the  better  will  be  the  spirit  of  Masonry  among  its  membership.
These  observations  apply  to  every  law  established  for  the  government  of  the
Craft.
The  Master  of  a  Lodge  ought  to  be  well  acquainted  with  the  laws,  usages,
and  customs  of  the  Order.  He  ought  to  be  a  man  of  good  judgment,  discretion,
and  particularly  ought  to  have  his  passions  under  good  control.  He  ought  to
be  an  example  of  punctuality,  faithfulness,  zeal,  devotion,  and  uprightness.  If
the  Master  is  punctual  in  his  attendance  at  the  Lodge,  the  members  will  be
punctual  also.  If  the  Master  has  the  intelligence  and  capacity  to  instruct
properly  the  members,  they  will  also  be  intelligent  Masons.  Whatever  his
social  disposition  may  be  out  of  the  Lodge  among  his  brethren  and  friends,  in
the  Lodge  he  must  maintain  a  dignity  of  character  suited  to  the  position  which
he  occupies.
Freemasonry  is  a  system  of  order  and  regularity ;  the  work  of  the  Lodge  ought
therefore  to  be  conducted  free  from  confusion.  The  Lodge  being  under  the
charge  of  the  Master,  and  as  he  holds  the  gavel,  he  holds  in  his  hand  the  authori-
tative emblem  which  can  command  order  and  regularity.  The  gavel  should  be
used  with  the  utmost  caution ;  its  monitions  should  never  be  disregarded.  The
Master  is  supreme  in  his  Lodge ;  his  word  is  law ;  from  his  decision  there  is  no
appeal;  at  least  upon  questions  of  Masonic  usage  he  is,  according  to  the  general
verdict  of  Masonic  jurists,  above  all  law  during  his  term  of  office,  so  far  as  re-
gards the  membership  of  his  Lodge,  and  is  only  amenable  to  the  Grand  Lodge
for  any  misconduct  or  violation  of  the  laws  of  the  Order.
As  Lodges  are  constituted  now,  having  their  warrants  from  a  Grand  Lodge,
their  officers  and  members  are  under  obligations  to  support,  keep,  and  abide  by
the  Constitution  and  Laws  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  their  particular  jurisdiction;
hence  these  and  the  ancient  landmarks  form  the  code  of  laws  by  which  they  are
governed.  As  the  Constitution  and  Laws  of  the  many  Grand  Lodges  all  differ
one  from  the  other,  no  code  of  Masonic  Law  nor  principles  of  jurisprudence  can
be  universally  applicable  to  the  Craft  of  all  the  various  jurisdictions.  This  is  a
matter  that  ought  to  be  well  understood,  as  it  may  prevent  much  confusion  in
the  decision  of  Masonic  questions.
The  legislation  of  the  Craft  is  confined  to  Grand  Lodges.  Subordinate  Lodges
meet  for  purposes  expressed  in  the  warrants,  and  to  perform  the  functions  for
which  Freemasonry  was  instituted.  These  are,  to  open  and  close  the  Lodge  ac-
cording to  the  Eitual  practiced  in  each  jurisdiction,  to  make  Masons,  to  practice
charity,  to  impart  instruction,  to  perfect  themselves  in  the  work,  and  to  transact
the  usual  business  of  organized  associations.  The  whole  must  be  conducted  in
the  most  systematic  and  orderly  manner.  The  Lodge  during  its  sessions  must
be  under  the  control  and  direction  of  the  presiding  officer.  He  ought  to  be
well  acquainted  with  the  duties  of  the  chair,  and  be  vigilant  and  attentive  to  all

--- Sayfa 473 ---
THE   ENTERED   APPRENTICE.  461
that  transpires  in  the  Lodge.  He  ought  to  direct  all  the  business  so  as  to  avoid
confusion,  and  no  officer  ought  to  perform  any  duty  of  his  office  without  first
having  been  directed  from  the  Oriental  chair.  The  word  of  command  must
come  from  the  Master,  and  obedience  is  the  duty  of  all.
The  Lodge  being  opened  at  the  time  prescribed  in  the  By-Laws,  and  conse-
quently the  officers  in  their  proper  places,  the  Master  directs  the  business  as  in
his  judgment  is  best  to  the  interest  of  the  Lodge,  and  according  to  circum-
stances. The  reading  of  the  minutes  of  the  preceding  meeting  is  usually  the
first  business.  The  Master,  however,  may  transpose  the  business.  And  here
we  may  be  permitted  to  remark  that  as  it  is  becoming  a  practice  for  Grand  Lodges
to  frame  By-Laws  for  the  government  of  subordinate  Lodges — a  course  which
we  do  not  approve  of,  as  centralizing  a  power  already  too  great  in  Grand
Lodges — it  would  be  well  to  leave  the  routine  of  business  to  the  discretion  of
the  Worshipful  Masters,  as  no  code  of  By-Laws,  however  voluminous,  can  pro-
vide for  every  contingency  that  may  arise,  and  circumstances  may  occur  in
which  the  interests  of  the  Lodge  may  be  affected  by  being  compelled  to  pursue
a  prescribed  form.
It  is  unnecessary  to  notice  the  various  business  matters  transacted  in  the
Lodge.  The  members  should  be  silent,  and  remain  in  their  places  while  the
Lodge  is  in  session,  and  be  particularly  attentive  to  the  proceedings.  There
should  be  no  whispering  while  the  minutes  are  being  read,  or  reports  of  com-
mittees, or  balloting,  which  are  pursued  in  succession,  or  during  the  work  of
Entering,  Crafting,  or  Baising,  which,  if  candidates  are  present,  are  followed  in
order.  If  the  Secretary  has  omitted  something,  or  the  record  is  at  fault,  a  mem-
ber may  state  the  fact  by  respectfully  rising  and  addressing  the  chair.  The
presiding  officer  must  in  all  cases  be  addressed,  if  a  brother  wishes  to  speak.
The  minutes  ought  to  show  clearly  all  the  transactions  of  the  Lodge,  and  before
closing  the  Lodge,  and  after  reading  the  collections,  the  amounts  and  from  whom
received,  the  proceedings,  as  recorded,  ought  to  be  read.  And  as  the  brethren
while  in  the  Lodge  meet  upon  the  level,  so  they  ought  to  part  upon  the  square,
and  each  maintain  a  rigid  silence  as  to  the  proceedings  of  the  Lodge,  as  best
conducive  to  the  harmony  and  welfare  of  the  institution.
THE  ENTEEED  APPEENTICE.
As  Blue  Masonry  forms  the  basis,%nd  is  the  foundation  of  all  other  branches
of  our  mystic  Order,  so  the  Entered  Apprentice  degree  is  the  corner-stone  of
Freemasonry,  upon  which  all  the  other  degrees  are  built.  It  is  in  this  degree
the  initiated  is  brought  to  light,  to  behold  the  beauties  of  the  Masonic  Order  ;
and  has  revealed  to  him  the  system  which  in  the  beginning  of  his  Masonic
creation  connects  him  in  the  chain  of  fraternity  with  the  brotherhood  through-
out the  globe.  In  this  degree  he  is  linked  in  the  universal  chain  and  is  hailed
as  a  brother,  and  the  hand  of  Masonic  fellowship  extended  to  him.  The  initia-
tion of  a  candidate  into  the  mysteries  of  Freemasonry  ought  to  be  considered  by
him  a  most  important  event :  he  enters  a  new  life,  forms  new  relations  and  con-

--- Sayfa 474 ---
462  world's  masonic  register.
nections,  and  as  a  member  of  the  cosmopolitan  Order,  he  becomes  a  citizen  of
the  world,  in  every  part  of  which  he  finds  a  home  and  brothers  of  the  same
family.  To  him  it  is  a  new  birth  :  he  is  ushered  into  existence,  as  it  were,  from
the  womb  of  darkness  into  the  light  of  day.  He  is  then  first  taught  to  stand
erect  in  the  majesty  of  his  manhood,  as  all  the  children  of  the  Good  Father
should  stand  before  Him,  free  from  sin  and  guiltless  before  God  and  men.  As
a  child,  he  is  taught  to  walk  with  careful  step,  lest  he  should  stumble  and  fall
in  the  narrow  path  which  leads  to  God.  He  is  also  like  a  youthful  learner  taught
his  first  lessons  of  the  mystic  science  in  easy  symbolic  teachings  readily  to  be
comprehended,  which  are  enforced  in  language  significant  and  impressive,  so  that
on  the  heart's  tracing-board  they  may  be  indelibly  fixed.  Happy  the  learner
within  whose  bosom  these  teachings  are  firmly  traced  and  acted  out  in  every-day
life.  An  Entered  Apprentice,  like  a  new-born  infant,  is  always  greeted  with  a
hearty  welcome  and  hailed  with  gladness  and  joy,  and  becomes  at  once  domiciled
and  affiliated  with  the  members  of  the  household  under  whose  guidance  he  has
placed  himself.  As  a  dutiful  child  he  should  learn  his  lessons  well,  be  obedient
to  his  instructors,  and  in  his  daily  walks  and  conversation  exhibit  a  lively
gratitude  for  the  favor  shown  him  in  electing  him  to  a  relationship  with  the
ancient  and  honorable  Order.
WARDEN,  IN  ABSENCE  OF  THE  MASTER.
The  right  of  the  Warden  to  preside  in  the  absence  of  the  Master  is  imposed
upon  him  by  the  sixth  section  of  fifth  of  the  Ancient  Charges,  which  reads :
"When  a  Fellow  Craftsman  is  chosen  Warden  of  the  work  under  the  Master,
he  shall  be  true  both  to  Master  and  Fellows,  shall  carefully  oversee  the  work  in
the  Master's  absence  to  the  Lord's  profit,  and  his  brethren  shall  obey  him.''  It
is  made  imperative  upon  the  brethren  to  obey  him,  and  consequently  it  is  his
duty  to  discharge  all  of  the  obligations  of  the  chair  in  the  absence  of  the  Master
— how  otherwise  could  the  brethren  obey  him  unless  he  presided  and  performed
the  duties  of  the  Master  ?  The  proper  construction  of  the  Ancient  Charges
implies  competency  on  the  part  of  the  Warden,  and  a  discrimination  in  the
selection  of  the  officer.  It  cannot  be  too  strongly  enforced  that  the  brother
chosen  Warden  of  the  work  should  be  possessed  of  Masonic  zeal  and  ability,  so
that  either  on  arriving  at  the  Master's  chair  or  being  called  upon  to  preside  in
consequence  of  the  Master's  absence,  he^be  capable  to  discharge  the  duties
pertaining  to  the  Orient.  He  cannot  be  true  to  either  Master  or  Fellows  if  he
is  not  proficient  and  cannot  fulfill  the  duties  of  the  chair.  The  positive  declara-
tion, "  and  his  brethren  shall  obey  him,"  implies  that  he  shall  have  acquired  a
knowledge  of  all  the  Master's  duties  and  oversee  the  work  to  the  Lord's  profit.
It  is  also  the  duty  of  the  members  of  a  Lodge  to  be  satisfied  that  the  brother
chosen  as  Warden  has  the  necessary  qualifications  to  fit  him  for  the  office.
No  rule  or  regulation  of  a  Grand  Lodge,  or  dispensation  of  a  Grand
Master,  can  deprive  the  Warden  of  his  right  to  oversee  the  Master's  work  in
his  absence ;  that  is,  in  the  absence  of  the  Master  from  any  cause.   The  Warden

--- Sayfa 475 ---
MASONIC  RULES.  463
shall  be  true,  shall  carefully  oversee  the  work,  shall  preside  and  discharge  all
the  duties  of  the  Master.  The  above  landmark  involves  more  than  is  generally
seen  on  the  surface.  If  it  is  made  the  imperative  duty  of  the  Warden  to  "over-
see the  work  iu  the  Master's  absence,"  can  a  Warden  resign  1  We  emphatically
say  no.  He  cannot  without  violating  his  obligation  ;  and  if  the  Warden  cannot
resign,  the  Master  surely  cannot.  There  is  a  beauty,  a  harmonious  system  in
the  government  of  Freemasonry,  which,  to  be  appreciated,  must  be  carefully
studied.  A  Lodge,  or  a  Grand  Lodge,  once  organized,  cannot  in  any  probable
event  be  left  deficient,  and  the  obligation  of  office  once  taken  cannot  be  annulled
until  the  end  of  the  period  stated,  and  the  regular  election  and  installation  of  a
successor.  The  rights  and  duties  of  the  chair  devolve  upon  the  Warden,  if  the
Master  dies,  removes  from  the  jurisdiction,  or  is  unable  from  any  cause  to  attend
the  meetings  of  the  Lodge ;  and  no  Lodge  can,  consistently  with  the  landmarks
of  Freemasonry,  absolve  the  Master  from  his  obligation  by  accepting  his  resig-
nation. The  obligation  once  taken,  cannot  be  abrogated ;  it  is  binding  upon
the  officer  and  the  Lodge.  The  covenant  is  of  too  solemn  and  binding  a
character ;  no  circumstances  or  contingencies  can  Masonically  cause  its  revo-
cation.
MASONIC  RULES.
Never  solicit  any  man  to  become  a  Mason.
Never  recommend  an  applicant  unless  you  know  him  to  be  a  good  man,  and
who  will  conform  to  the  precepts  of  the  institution.
Never  cast  your  ballot  in  favor  of  a  candidate  unless  you  know  him  to  be
worthy,  and  his  moral  character  free  from  reproach.
Never  fail  to  exercise  your  rights  as  a  member  of  your  Lodge,  and  vote  upon
every  application.
Never  let  it  be  known,  either  directly  or  indirectly,  how  you  vote  upon  an  ap-
plication for  the  mysteries  of  the  Order.
Never  be  afraid  to  do  your  duty  if  you  believe  a  candidate  is  not  worthy  to  be
received  into  membership  with  us.
Never  speak  of  Lodge  matters  in  unseemly  or  improper  places.
Never  indulge  in  practices  that  may  bring  reproach  upon  the  institution.
Never  forget  that  you  are  a  Freemason,  a  link  in  the  chain  of  the  universal
brotherhood.
Never  be  absent  from  the  meetings  of  your  Lodge  if  you  can  help  it.
Never  forget  that  a  Freemason  is  your  brother,  and  treat  him  accordingly.
Never  fail  to  admonish  a  brother  if  you  see  him  err.
Never  repel  the  approach  of  a  brother  because  he  is  poor.
A  Mason  must  be  a  "peaceable  subject  to  the  civil  powers,  wherever  he  resides
or  works."
He  must  never  be  concerned  in  plots  and  conspiracies  against  the  peace  and
welfare  of  the  nation.
He  must  be  cautious  in  his  words  and  carriage.
He  must  act  as  becomes  a  moral  and  wise  man.

--- Sayfa 476 ---
464  world's  masonic  register.
He  must  consult  his  health  by  not  continuing  too  long  from  home  after
Lodge  hours.
He  must  avoid  gluttony  and  drunkenness  so  that  his  family  be  not  neglected
or  injured,  nor  he  be  disabled  from  working.
He  must  relieve  a  brother,  if  he  can,  when  he  is  in  want.
He  is  to  avoid  all  wrangling  and  quarreling ;  all  back-biting  and  slander.
He  must  defend  his  brother's  character,  and  do  him  all  good  offices  as  far  as  is
consistent  with  his  honor  and  safety.
Masons  must  salute  each  other  courteously,  calling  each  other  brother.
MASONRY'S  PROVINCE.
Freemasonry  has  a  glorious  mission  to  perform  in  promoting  the  future  wel-
fare of  the  human  family.  In  the  progress  of  civilization  through  all  past  ages,
it  has  been  the  pioneer,  it  has  pointed  out  the  way,  and  prepared  man  for
greater,  and  still  greater  usefulness.  It  has  been  prominent  in  all  the  leading
movements  which  had  for  their  object  the  improvement  and  advancement  of
society.  In  the  progress  of  science,  the  cultivation  of  the  arts,  improved  legis-
lation, and  physical  and  intellectual  development,  Freemasonry  always  has  and
always  will  control  and  direct  the  human  mind  and  the  energies  of  the  race,
because  its  aim  is — the  great  purposes  of  its  institution,  for  which  it  was
established — to  qualify  man  so  to  live  as  to  achieve  the  purposes  for  which  he  was
created,  and  to  prepare  and  fit  him  to  become  a  living  stone  in  God's  Holy
Temple.  The  progress  of  use  is  developed  in  the  history  of  man,  as  the  ultimate
of  his  condition,  and  is  unfolded  in  the  book  of  nature  as  God's  established  law.
It  is  Masonry's  especial  province,  as  the  echo  of  the  past  and  as  its  sublime  princi-
ples teach,  to  co-operate  with  the  Divine  Creator  in  developing  the  hidden
mysterious  uses,  latent  in  the  world  of  nature  and  intellect,  which  the  Supreme
Architect  has  wisely  hidden  from  observation,  so  that  his  creatures  in  the  pur-
suit of  knowledge  would  unfold  the  great  scheme  of  humanity.  In  the  progress
of  life  and  the  advancement  of  the  human  family,  the  progression  of  man  to  the
attainment  of  a  higher  perfection  is  the  ultimate  of  the  individual  and  the  final
destiny  of  mankind ;  and  to  the  advancement  of  this  great  scheme  of  progres-
sion, the  love  principle  in  its  magnetic  influences  will  attract  man  more  and
more  closely  to  his  brother  man  to  co-operate  and  unite  with  him,  and  thus,  in
the  establishment  of  a  "  brotherhood  of  man,"  the  plan  of  the  Divine  Architect
will  be  accomplished.  In  the  promotion  of  this  great  work,  the  brotherhood  of
man,  Freemasonry,  through  the  influence  of  its  beneficent  principles  lived  up  to
by  the  upright  and  true  Crafts-men,  in  quiet  unobtrusiveness  will  yet  accomplish
the  object  of  its  institution.  Man  needs  the  fellowship  of  his  brother.  The  co-
operation of  society  is  necessary  to  develop  the  energies  and  enterprises  for
man's  use.  Freemasonry  binds  with  the  cords  of  love  those  who  are  true  to
their  God  and  themselves,  and  through  the  magic  influence  of  love  combined
with  a  faithful  discharge  of  Masonry's  obligations,  the  brotherhood  of  man  will
be  established.

--- Sayfa 477 ---
FREEMASONRY. — THE  LAW  OP   LOVE.  465
FREEMASONRY.
Freemasonry,  in  every  age  and  in  all  lands,  has  ranked  among  its  disciples
the  brightest  intellects,  the  men  of  genius  and  mind,  those  whose  names  are  im-
printed upon  the  world's  history,  who  gave  forth  thoughts  clothed  in  tangible
realities,  blessing  mankind  with  their  labors,  which  the  human  family  will  forever
enjoy,  and  which,  because  of  their  enduring  character,  are  the  best  evidences  of
and  prove  the  immortality  of  man.  These  have  lived  for  the  good  of  the  race ;
such  was  their  aim  and  purpose  ;  it  was  no  selfish  atmosphere  they  breathed.
Among  a  host  of  those,  the  fruits  of  whose  intellectual  labors  and  devotion
to  the  cause  of  humanity  the  generations  of  men  passed  away  and  those  now
living  have  gratefully  awarded  the  high  meed  of  being  benefactors  of  the  race,
who  were  Freemasons,  members  of  our  time-honored  Order,  we  will  only  name
Washington,  Franklin,  and  Fulton.  These,  in  their  lives,  practically  exemplified
the  principles  of  Freemasonry,  and  these  are  evidences  of  its  influences  in  de-
veloping mind.  The  immortality  of  man  and  his  close  relation  to  the  Eternal
Father  are  indicated  by  an  analogy  that  scarce  admits  of  a  doubt,  in  the  per-
manence of  thought,  the  creations  of  the  mind  which  live  forever  in  the  world  of
man,  and  are  perpetuated  evermore.  In  the  race  of  intellectual  development,
Freemasons  are  always  foremost,  ever  in  advance,  because  true  to  the  principles
of  the  institution,  they  are  true  to  their  own  natures,  and  true  to  the  Eternal
Father.
THE  LAW  OF  LOVE.
As  far  back  in  the  records  of  time  as  the  promulgation  of  the  law,  embracing
within  the  Ten  Commandments  the  essential  points  of  the  religious  and  civil
code  of  nations,  the  principle  of  love  toward  God  and  man  was  inculcated.  As
a  sentiment  particularly  beautiful  in  theory,  it  has  been  approved  by  all  religious
bodies,  and  the  duty  of  man  loving  God  and  his  fellow-man  adopted  as  a  part  of
their  theological  creed.  But  beyond  the  mere  theological  expression  of  the
sentiment,  it  has  always  been  nearly  a  dead  letter;  the  practice,  except  in
isolated  cases,  has  never,  by  either  layman  or  teacher,  if  words  and  actions  are
evidence,  been  considered  as  a  duty  obligatory  upon  man.  In  assuming  for
Freemasonry  a  high  morality,  and  the  practice  of  the  most  sacred  obligations
the  relation  of  man  to  his  fellow-man  imposes,  we  do  not  reflect  upon  other  in-
stitutions professing  more,  further  than  to  state  the  naked  and  incontrovertible
truth,  and  in  asserting  that  love  and  good-will  to  man  is  lived  out  in  the  walks
and  circumstances  of  life  to  a  greater  degree  among  Freemasons,  as  members  of
the  institution,  than  among  those  of  any  other  religious  or  benevolent  associa-
tion, we  are  not  deceiving  ourselves  nor  making  vain  pretensions  for  the  purpose
of  deception.  The  mere  profession  of  good-will  to  our  neighbor,  without  reduc-
ing it  to  practice  in  life,  is  like  covering  a  filthy  form  with  a  beautiful  garment.
God  is  love,  and  the  manifestations  of  His  love  are  seen  in  all  His  works,  if  we

--- Sayfa 478 ---
466  world's  masonic  register.
appreciate  and  correctly  interpret  the  unceasing  regard  of  our  Heavenly  Parent
for  all  the  children  of  His  creation.  Be  good,  be  kind,  love  your  brother,  will
be  seen  deeply  imprinted  with  the  Divine  finger  upon  all  that  the  outer  and
inner  senses  can  discern.  To  profess  to  love  God,  and  not  love  the  being  made
in  His  image,  is  an  idle  pretense,  a  myth,  because  we  can  only  manifest  love  to
God  through  the  representative  of  the  Divine  image.  If  Freemasons  do  not
love  their  brother  man,  and,  indeed,  there  are  some  who  do  not,  that  is  only
proof  that  such  do  not  live  up  to  their  professions.  The  law  of  love  is  stamped
upon  the  breast  of  every  man.  If  it  is  not  developed,  it  is  a  sure  indication  that
the  impression  has  been  effaced  by  corrupt  teachings,  by  neglecting  to  cultivate
the  Divine  nature,  by  the  engrossment  of  the  selfish  desires  and  the  gratification
of  the  animal  passions.  Man's  love  for  his  fellow-man  has  not  been  manifested
to  any  extent  in  this  world,  and  yet  man's  need  of  his  kind  at  all  times  and  sea-
sons ought  to  insure  the  most  sincere  and  kindly  feelings  for  his  brother.  Free-
masonry, in  its  original  institution,  and  as  it  at  the  present  time  teaches,  has  for
its  object  to  bind  men  closely  together  by  the  golden  chain  of  love,  to  unfold  the
kindly  sympathies  of  our  natures,  to  practice  those  duties  which  the  mysterious
voice  of  God  within  us  directs  we  should  do,  that  thus  in  the  faithful  discharge  of
our  mission  as  intelligent  beings  we  promote  our  own  as  well  as  our  neighbor's
welfare,  and  manifest  our  love  to  the  Great  Author  of  our  being.
THE  BALLOT.
The  highest  duty  which  a  Freemason  can  exercise  in  his  Masonic  character  is
that  of  the  ballot.  It  should,  therefore,  be  exercised  conscientiously  and  hon-
estly, and  never  lightly  or  with  indifference,  nor  where  there  is  any  doubt.  The
purity  of  the  institution  depends  upon  the  ballot.  If  unworthy  applicants  are
admitted  into  the  Lodge,  it  is  i  because  a  due  regard  to  the  ballot  has  not  been
had.  The  ballot  is  the  safeguard  of  the  institution,  and  the  Freemason  who
votes  for  an  applicant  without  due  inquiry,  or  has  doubts  as  to  the  person's  fit-
ness to  become  a  member,  is  equally  culpable  with  the  one  who  will  vote  against
a  good  and  worthy  man  because  of  some  personal  differences  or  prejudices.  The
highest  and  purest  motives  ought  to  govern  the  Craft  in  the  exercise  of  the  ballot.
No  man  has  a  right  to  become  a  member  of  Our  order,  only  such  as  moral  excel-
lence and  worth  can  confer ;  and  these  only  entitle  him  to  seek  fellowship  with  us,
and  he  must  undergo  the  ordeal  of  a  unanimous  ballot.  If  no  discrimination  can  be
made  in  favor  of  the  man  of  exalted  virtues,  surely  the  door  ought  to  be  guarded
closely,  ay,  most  closely,  against  those  concerning  whom  we  have  a  doubt.  The
ballot  has  not  been  exercised  with  a  due  care  to  the  purity  integrity,  and  perpetu-
ity of  the  institution.  We  have  enjoyed  an  unusual  degree  of  prosperity.  The
great  desire  for  Masonry  is  abating.  Let  us  not  fall  into  the  other  error,  that
when  so  many  were  knocking  at  our  door  it  was  difficult  to  discriminate  between
the  good,  and  all,  or  nearly  so,  were  admitted,  that  now  when  the  applicants  are
few,  these  must  be  received  in  order  to  support  the  Lodges  and  perpetuate  the
institution.  This  will  be  a  most  fatal  error.  Exercise  the  ballot  with  a  discrim-
inating judgment,  and  have  no  fear  as  to  the  results.

--- Sayfa 479 ---
THE   GOLDEN   RULE.  461
THE  GOLDEN  RULE.
If  Freemasons  do  not  exemplify  in  practice  the  duties  of  humanity,  if  they
do  not  exhibit  in  their  intercourse  with  each  other  and  the  world  the  golden
rule  so  emphatically  taught  in  all  the  mysteries,  from  the  first  step  to  the  last,
then  in  vaia  may  we  look  elsewhere  for  that  great  good  which  it  is  incum-
bent on  every  child  of  man  to  assist  in  accomplishing ;  for  the  lion  and  the
lamb,  the  strong  and  the  weak  man  to  dwell  together  in  peace,  and  to  be  linked
in  the  golden  chain  of  humanity's  relations  so  that  the  principle  of  love  will
attract  them,  and  the  claims  of  a  common  nature  actuate  them  in  all  of  their
social  intercourse  with  each  other.  It  is  not  contemplated  that  the  day  of  this
great  good  is  to  be  postponed  until  »  future  time,  wheu  it  is  supposed  that  the
laws  which  govern  the  universe  will  be  disturbed  and  the  course  of  the  elements
changed,  but  it  is  the  duty  of  every  man,  and  particularly  those  who  are  bound
by  obligations  of  a  sacred  and  fraternal  character,  now,  at  this  time,  each  one
for  himself,  to  apply  the  golden  rule  to  all  of  his  actions,  to  square  his  conduct
by  the  eternal  law  of  love — love  for  his  fellow-man — so  that  within  his  sphere,
and  within  the  circumference  of  his  individual  self,  there  shall  be  no  war,  no
antagonism,  no  hostility  to  his  fellows.
The  time  for  turning  spears  into  pruning-hooks,  and  swords  into  plowshares,
and  establishing  peace  between  man  and  man  is  even  now,  this  day,  and  any
postponement  to  a  future  period  is  only  a  continued  violation-of  the  law  of  love
which  ought  to  bind  man  in  fraternal  relations  with  his  fellow-man,  and  the
golden  rule  form  the  basis  of  all  his  intercourse  and  social  obligations.  The
ideal  future,  when  man  will  not  be  influenced  by  the  passions  of  his  animal
nature,  is  too  far  distant  and  problematical  to  govern  rational,  intelligent  creat-
ures who  have  already  commenced  their  immortal  career,  and  to  whom  every
moment  is  important  in  developing  the  perfection  of  their  natures  in  their  prog-
ress onward  and  upward  to  the  ultimate  of  all  perfections.  Our  duties  com-
mence here.  We  must  be  provident  of  our  time.  The  Great  Author  of  creation
has  purposed  that  his  creatures  shall  avail  themselves  of  the  circumstances  and
conditions  of  the  sphere  within  which  they  are  placed  to  develop  the  highest
plane  their  natures  are  capable  of  attaining.  There  can  be  no  modification,  no
change  of  the  eternal  principles  which  God  has  established  from  the  beginning
of  the  creation,  in  order  to  accommodate  His  creatures  in  pursuits  irrational,
and  which  are  not  of  an  upward,  progressive  tendency.  The  laws  of  God  are
immutable.  The  period  of  man's  progression  commences  in  the  earthly  life.  It
is  here  where  the  foundation  of  our  future  must  be  laid — here  where  the  law  of
love  must  be  developed — here  where  the  golden  rule  must  be  practiced — here
where  the  strong  passions  of  our  animal  nature  must  be  controlled  by  reason —
here  where  the  first  step  of  our  existence  commences,  and  the  structure  is
erected  which  forms  the  tabernacle  for  the  immortal  spirit — and  it  is  here  where
we  form  the  link  in  the  chain  of  immortal  existences.  It  is,  then,  our  plain  duty
to  observe  the  golden  rule,  to  practice  it,  to  make  it  the  basis  of  all  our  actions,

--- Sayfa 480 ---
468  world's  masonic  register.
and  thus  demonstrate  in  ourselves  that  we  have  lived  up  to  that  good  time,  that
we  have  approached  that  happy  era,  that  the  warring  passions  of  our  nature
have  been  changed  to  those  of  a  peaceful  character,  and  a  regard  for  the  Divine
image  in  man  forms  the  basis  which  influences  and  directs  us  in  our  daily  life
and  conversation.
THE  PROBLEM  OF  MAW'S  MISSION.
It  would  indeed  be  strange  if  Freemasonry  did  not  keep  pace  with  the  prog-
ress of  intellectual  development,  with  the  improvement  of  the  age  in  the  useful
arts,  in  mental  and  practical  philosophy,  and  the  working  out  and  elucidation  of
the  great  problem,  the  mission  of  man.  Freemasonry  has  to  do  with  man — man
the  highest  creation  of  the  Supreme  Mind,  man  individually,  and  man  in  the
aggregate,  and  through  the  exemplification  and  influence  of  its  principles
and  precepts  lead  the  way  in  promoting  the  advancement  and  elevation  of  the
race.  Like  the  silent  operations  of  nature  which  although  unseen  clothe  the
field  with  verdure,  cause  the  blossoms  to  unfold  and  the  fruit  to  ripen,  or,
through  the  creations  of  animalculae  scarcely  perceptible  of  which  islands  are
formed,  so,  Freemasonry  unobtrusively  and  in  quiet,  through  the  influence  of  the
practical  virtues  of  its  disciples  has  been  the  means  of  propagating  an  enlight-
ened philosophy  by  which  man  has  learned  to  subdue  and  govern  his  passions,
and  accord  to  others  that  which  he  claims  for  himself.  That  civilization  owes
much  to  the  humanizing  principles  of  Freemasonry  cannot  be  questioned,  indeed
it  would  be  difficult  to  assign  a  cause  of  greater  or  equal  potency  in  harmonizing
man,  who  with  diverse  interests,  dissimilar  dispositions,  and  peculiarities  arising
from  the  different  organic  structure  of  each  which  in  an  uncultivated  state,  or
where  the  influence  of  Freemasonry  has  not  reached,  is  exhibited  in  the  an-
tagonism of  man  to  his  fellow-man,  but  wherever  Freemasonry  manifests  itself,
and  wherever  the  civilized  man  goes  to  plant  his  standard  for  the  purpose  of
making  the  soil  subservient  to  his  purposes,  there  Freemasonry  goes  also,  and
through  the  influence  of  its  teachings  impels  him  to  walk  erect  in  the  majesty
of  his  manhood  as  a  being  destined  for  the  highest  purposes.  In  working  out
the  problem  of  his  mission,  the  Freemason  who  walks  onward,  ever  onward
toward  the  goal  of  perfection,  is  never  off,  but  is  continually  advancing  from
lower  to  higher,  always  traveling  out  of  the  sphere  in  which  he  is,  onward
and  upward  to  a  better,  the  point  within  the  centre  being  his  aim.  Thus  the
true  Freemason  always  keeps  pace  with  the  progressive  developments  of  man ;
but  those  who  are  contented  with  the  mere  ceremonial  of  Freemasonry,  who  have
not  the  disposition  to  pass  out  of  the  outer  court,  or  to  acquire  the  knowledge
necessary  to  comprehend  the  symbolism  of  the  architecture  of  the  interior  of
the  temple,  have  no  conception  of  man's  mission,  nor  do  they  participate  in
working  out  or  elucidating  the  great  problem,  man's  present  and  future  being.
Alas !  the  outer  courts  are  crowded,  full,  and  more  than  full,  and  there  the  vast
majority  of  initiates  remain,  preventing  often  good  and  true  men  from  entering,
while  within  the  sanctum  sanctorum  there  is  much  empty  space.

--- Sayfa 481 ---
THE   KIND   WORD    SPOKEN. — THE   FRATERNAL  ELEMENT.  469
THE  KIND  WORD  SPOKEN.
"Bless  you  for  the  kind  word  spoken !"  was  the  response  of  a  poorly-clad  and
wearied-looking  man,  who  had  seated  himself  on  the  steps  of  a  large  mansion,
in  reply  to  a  gentlemanly  person  who  approached  and  was  about  mounting  the
steps,  and  who  in  a  kindly  and  sympathetic  tone  of  voice  addressed  the  stranger :
"My  good  man,  you  look  wearied  and  fatigued;  come  into  the  house  and  rest
yourself,  and  partake  of  some  refreshment,  as  you  appear  to  be  in  need  of  nour-
ishment." The  tears  rose  in  the  eyes  of  the  stranger  as  he  listened  to  the  above
words.  He  was  indeed  nearly  worn  out  with  fatigue,  having  traveled  far  to  reach
the  city,  and  had  not  partaken  of  food  during  the  day.  He  had  seated  himself
on  several  steps  before  to  rest  himself,  and  from  each  he  had  been  driven  as  a
vagrant,  until,  sad  and  sorrowful  of  heart,  he  had  gone  onward  as  long  as  he
was  able  to  walk,  the  demon  of  dark  despair  encircling  round  his  soul,  when  of
a  sudden  the  bright  rays  of  heaven  shone  upon  him  by  the  magic  influence  of
the  sympathetic  voice  that  spoke  kindly  to  him.  Oh,  proud  and  haughty  man,
what  will  your  wealth  avail  you  when  the  summons  comes  for  you  to  pass  away
from  earth?  How  will  the  record  of  your  heart  bear  evidence  for  kindness
shown  to  your  poor  brother  ?  Even  though  he  be  poor,  ay,  and  has  sinned,  he
is  your  brother  notwithstanding,  and  your  obligations  to  him  are  as  binding  as
though  he  were  your  equal  in  wealth ;  yes,  more  so,  for.you  have  that  which  he
needs,  and  duty  and  humanity  demand  that  you  should  supply  at  least  his  present
needs.  The  kind  word  spoken  to  the  poor  and  those  bowed  in  affliction  touches
a  chord  whose  vibrations  ascend  to  the  celestial  sphere,  and  seraph  hearts  beat
with  gladness  and  joy.  Such  words  are  God's  messengers.  The  poor  man,
though  forlorn  and  forsaken  of  men,  in  the  purity  of  his  soul  and  his  affinities
may  be  fitted  for  a  high  place  in  the  mansions  of  celestial  glory.  It  may  be
God's  purpose  that  the  poor,  and  even  those  termed  vicious,  are  among  us  as
trials  of  man's  love  and  humanity.  Oh,  wealthy  man,  take  heed  and  spurn  not
the  poor  and  the  destitute,  for  they  are  human — they  are  your  brothers  !  The
God  who  created  you  created  them.  You  are  both  made  in  his  image  and  his
likeness.
THE  FRATERNAL  ELEMENT.
Oh  that  man  would  cultivate  within  himself  a  fraternal  feeling  for  his  brother
man,  and  be  governed  in  his  communions,  his  social  relations,  his  sympathies,
by  the  principle  of  love,  and  not  by  impulses,  according  to  circumstances  or
accidental  surroundings  1  Life  on  earth  is  necessarily  brief,  and  why  should  man ,
in  violation  of  the  laws  of  the  heavenly  principle  of  love  implanted  in  his  nature
by  the  Father  of  all,  harbor  animosity,  be  unkind,  deceive  or  injure  his  brother
man  ?  Every  act,  word,  and  thought  go  to  make  up  the  constituent  elements  of
the  man;  and  is  it  not  better  to  cultivate  and  develop  the  good,  the  heavenly,
the  God  in  man,  than  the  evil  ?    The  unkind  word  spoken  can  never  be  recalled,

--- Sayfa 482 ---
470  world's  masonic  register.
its  effects  upon  ourselvtes  may  not  be  wiped  out  in  time,  so  with  anger,  deception,
willful  wrong ;  while  these  are  a  perfect  barrier  to  our  progress  onward  and  up-
ward, they  render  us  incapable  of  enjoying  the  pure  delights  of  communion  with
the  immortal  spirit.  Nor  do  the  effects  cease  with  the  spirit's  entrance  into  an-
other sphere.  The  deception,  the  wrong,  the  evils  of  anger  and  unkindness  re-
main, and  are  not  obliterated  because  of  the  separation  of  the  body  and  spirit,
and  the  necessary  change  of  condition  from  the  visible  to  the  invisible,  from  the
earthly  to  the  spiritual  sphere.  That  must  be  a  work  of  progress,  spiritual  prog-
ress, from  out  of  the  sphere  in  which  we  are  to  a  higher,  and  higher,  and  better;
a  progress  which  has  no  termination.  The  law  is  as  immutable  and  fixed  as  the
existence  of  the  Creator,  that  in  order  to  progress  heavenward,  we  must  endeavor
to  attain  the  good,  and  divest  ourselves  of  all  evil.  It  is  neither  impossible  nor
impracticable  to  attain  the  highest  degree  of  perfection  our  nature  is  capable  of,
if  we  only  cultivate  the  germs  of  those  principles  implanted  in  us  by  the  Creator,
and  develop  all  that  is  good,  and  true,  and  just  of  the  living  spirit  within  us.
Our  relations  to  our  fellow-man  render  it  not  only  necessary  but  obligatory  upon
every  human  being  to  aid  the  designs  of  the  Father  of  all ;  to  promote  a  kindly,
generous,  fraternal  fellowship,  and  to  harmonize  the  variety  of  individualities,
and  unite  them  by  the  golden  bonds  of  love  into  one  great  fraternal  brother-
hood. To  effect  this,  every  man  must  begin  with  himself.  If  in  consequence
of  education,  association,  or  from  any  other  cause,  the  elements  of  an  antagon-
istic disposition  to  the  law  of  love  and  fraternity  control,  the  greater  the  neces-
sity to  work  a  reform ;  and  it  only  needs  application,  a  severe  and  rigid  scrutiny
into  his  own  interior  life,  an  unceasing  vigilance,  and  an  earnest  and  sincere
desire  to  improve  and  perfect  himself  in  order  to  subject  the  grosser  passions  of
his  nature  to  proper  discipline ;  and  however  difficult  all  this  may  seem,  yet  man
has  the  power  within  himself  to  govern  the  elements  of  discord  and  to  rise
superior  to  their  control.  The  fraternal  element  is  God's  sphere,  and  in  that
element  man  should  live  and  move,  for  such  was  the  design  of  his  being.  Love
your  brother  man  is  inscribed  upon  the  records  of  Revelation,  and  upon  the
hearts  of  all  immortal  intelligences.
MASONRY  IS  NOT  RELIGION.
It  is  a  stereotyped  remark  of  most  orators  of  the  clerical  order,  in  delivering
addresses  before  bodies  of  Freemasons,  that  "  Masonry  is  not  religion,"  while  at
the  same  time  they  eulogize  in  the  highest  degree  the  principles,  tenets,  morality,
and  practical  benevolence  of  Freemasonry.  We  have  often  had  it  in  our  mind
to  ask  those  learned  divines,  our  brother  Chaplains,  what  is  religion  ?  If  reli-
gion is  to  do  justly,  love  mercy,  and  walk  humbly  before  God  and  man,  then  we
say  that  Masonry  is  religion,  because  it  teaches  love  and  obedience  to  God  and
his  holy  laws,  and  love  to  man,  and  reverence  and  humility.  If  by  religion  is
meant  a  creed — a  system  of  theological  dogmas  of  any  or  a  particular  church —
then  we  say  Amen,  that  Masonry  is  not  religion.  The  religion  of  Masonry  is
not  a  system  of  abstruse  metaphysical  dogmas,  but  its  tenets  are  plain,  practical,

--- Sayfa 483 ---
THE   FIRST   STEP.  4T1
and  of  universal  comprehension.  The  highest  aspirations  of  the  soul  cannot  go
beyond  a  sincere  love  and  veneration  for  Him  who  created  all  things ;  and  to
love  G-od  with  all  our  heart  and  soul,  and  our  neighbor  as  ourselves,  is  the
highest  manifestation — the  very  highest — of  devotion. ,  This  Masonry  teaches  in
all  of  its  degrees,  not  as  abstract  dogmas,  but  as  realities  evinced  in  the  life  and
conduct  of  its  disciples.  The  religion  of  Masonry  constructs  no  wall  to  separate
one  portion  of  the  Craft  from  the  rest ;  but  within  its  spacious  temple  all,  with-
out any  violation  of  their  principles  or  profession,  worship  at  its  altars  as  one
loving  brotherhood,  in  harmony  and  peace.  If  by  religion  is  meant  the  religion
of  the  church,  then  we  admit  that  Masonry  is  not  religion,  because  the  church
has  never  been  able,  nay,  has  never  sought  to  embrace  in  communion  their
brother  man,  because  he  was  a  man  and  their  brother ;  the  belief  in  a  certain
creed  is  generally  the  principal  and  essential  qualification — not  so  with  Masonry.
Masonry  teaches  that  during  our  pilgrimage  on  earth  we  must  practice  all  the
social  virtues,  exemplify  in  deeds  of  benevolence,  in  sympathy  and  affection,  our
regard  for  our  brother  man ;  and  fellowship  on  these  considerations  can  alone
be  claimed ;  and  while  Masonry  requires  the  evidence  of  a  virtuous  and  pure
life,  it  also  demands  that  the  basis  of  such  life  shall  have  its  foundation  in  an
acknowledgment  of  a  belief  in  the  one  living  and  true  God.  And  as  Masonry
teaches  the  immortality  of  the  soul,  it  is  conclusive  that  the  belief  in  God  and
obedience  to  his  holy  laws  have  for  their  object  the  happiness  of  man>  not 'only
in  this  life,  but  in  the  life  hereafter.  Can  religion,  in  its  highest  sense,  claim
more  ?    And  if  Masonry  is  not  religion,  must  it  not  be  something  better  ?
THE  FIRST  STEP.
The  first  step  in  Freemasonry  is  the  most  important,  and  should  not  only  so
be  considered  by  the  candidate,  but  he  should  be  so  instructed  by  the  Master  in
his  charge.  The  obligations  of  all  future  teachings  in  all  the  succeeding  degrees
are  based  upon  the  lessons  taught  in  the  initiatory  degree.  It  is  for  this  reason
that  the  Master  should  be  particularly  careful  to  impress  upon  the  candidate
the  exalted  privileges  to  which  he  has  been  admitted  by  having  the  honors  of
Freemasonry  conferred  upon  him.  In  receiving  this  degree  he  is  made  a  link  in
the  great  chain  of  Masonry  which  binds  him  with  good  and  true  men  in  every
part  of  the  world.  He  becomes  one  of  the  great  brotherhood.  He  is  for  the
first  time  admitted  into  a  Lodge  of  Freemasons,  and  becomes  acquainted  with
some  of  the  mysteries  of  the  Order.  Before  his  admission  he  is  like  all  the
world,  in  darkness,  as  regards  the  secrets  of  Freemasonry.  Having  entered,  he
is  brought  to  light,  and  beholds  that  which  to  the  uninitiated  must  ever  remain
a  secret.  It  is  also  an  evidence  that  he  passed  the  scrutinizing  ordeal  of  a
unanimous  ballot,  that  he  had  been  found  worthy  of  being  initiated  into  the
mysteries  of  the  Order,  and  that  the  members  were  willing  to  receive  him  as
one  of  their  Masonic  family.  In  taking  the  first  step  he  is  taught  that  as  he  has
been  found  upright  and  worthy,  so  should  he  ever  continue,  in  order  to  prove
that  the  confidence  of  the  brethren  has  not  been  misplaced.

--- Sayfa 484 ---
472  world's  masonic  register.
OFFICE  SEEKING.
It  is  a  failing  from  which  few  men  are  exempt  to  laud  those  who  occupy
prominent  positions  in  society,  not  regarding  the  means,  the  influence,  or  the
merit  which  may  have  given  them  such  distinction.  It  may  be  wealth,  which  is
also  lauded,  or  diplomacy,  intrigue  or  trickery,  which  has  given  a  man  a  promi-
nence ;  it  matters  not,  so  he  has  it  he  must  be  worshiped.  From  this  failing,  or
rather  weakness,  Freemasons  are  not  free;  they  also  worship  Baal,  and  hence
the  aspiration  for  office — to  be  elected  Master  or  Warden ;  and  hence  the  reason
also  why  the  membership  give  their  suffrages,  not  to  merit,  not  to  the  truly
deserving,  but  to  those  who  can  best  urge  their  pretensions.  This  is  not  uni-
versal. There  are  many  exceptions,  where  a  different  rule  prevails ;  but  in  large
cities  rotation  in  office  is  the  general  practice,  and  wherever  such  is  the  usage
ambition  is  excited,  and  schemes  planned  by  aspiring  members  in  order  to
secure  an  election.  We  need  not  say  that  such  practices  to  gain  office  are  un-
Masonic.  The  Freemason  must,  indeed,  be  very  ignorant  of  the  principles  of
Freemasonry  who  does  not  know  that  only  those  who  excel  in  Masonry  ought
to  be  advanced,  are  alone  entitled  to  its  honors ;  and  such  never  seek  office,
never  seek  distinction.  Our  experience  has  taught  us  that  the  best  working
Lodges,  and  indeed  the  best  Masons,  are  among  those  where  the  experienced
workmen  are  selected,  and  who  for  a  term  of  years  guide  the  destinies  of  the
Lodge.  The  practice  of  changing  officers  every  year,  for  the  purpose  of  making
Past  Masters,  is  a  bad  one.  The  influence  of  a  Lodge  may  be  increased  by  such
a  rule,  but  the  influence  is  necessarily  of  an  evil  character.
DUTIES  NOT  CIRCUMSCRIBED.
Freemasons  have  a  high  and  noble  mission.  Their  duties  are  not  circumscribed
to  ministering  only  to  the  physical  wants  of  their  brethren,  by  no  means.  There
are  higher  wants  than  those  which  belong  to  the  animal  man,  wants  which  only
the  sympathies  of  kind  and  generous  souls  can  supply.  In  relieving  the  physical
needs  of  our  brethren,  we  only  act  as  almoners  of  the  bounties  which  the  Good
Father  has  supplied  us  with,  we  give  a  portion  of  our  superabundance,  we  give
that  which  we  must  of  necessity  leave  behind  us  when  we  go  to  that  "  unseen
land"  where  spirits  and  angels  dwell,  we  give  of  that  which  neither  impoverishes
us  nor  contributes  to  our  future  welfare.  But  if  we  share  our  sympathies  with
our  brother,  if  we  inspire  him  with  hope  when  life  is  blank  and  all  is  drear
within,  if  we  animate  him  with  noble  aspirations,  if  we  arouse  his  drooping
energies,  if  we  encourage  him  to  pursue  life's  journey,  and  to  overcome  the
trials  and  temptations  of  our  nature,  if  by  our  counsel  and  guidance  we  aid  him
in  improving  himself  morally  and  spiritually,  then  we  really  act  up  to  our  high
vocation  not  only  as  members  of  the  Masonic  Order,  but  as  men  made  in  the
image  and  likeness  of  God.

--- Sayfa 485 ---
FREEMASONRY. — THE   ANCIENT   CHARGES.  473
FREEMASONRY.
The  world,  judging  Freemasonry  from  the  staud-point  of  some  who  have
unfortunately  been  admitted  into  the  institution,  do  it  and  the  majority  of  its
membership  great  injustice.  It  is  true  that  it  is  the  fault  of  the  members  that
unworthy  men  have  been  and  are  admitted  into  the  Masonic  brotherhood ;  but
where  is  the  institution  existing  that  is  not  liable  to,  and  whose  membership
have  not  committed  a  similar  error  1  Freemasons  are  but  men,  and  friendship
or  personal  interests  will  sway  the  minds  of  some,  and  cause  them  to  be  blind  to
the  faults  of  those  whom  they  desire  to  see  linked  in  the  fraternal  chain.  As  a
human  institution,  Freemasonry  is  based  upon  principles  calculated  to  develop
the  best  impulses  of  our  nature,  a  generous  philanthropy,  a  genuine  benevolence,
a  fraternal,  a  humanizing  spirit.  These  godlike  characteristics  are  exhibited  in
the  daily  life  and  practice  of  the  true  Freemason.  In  every  community  will  be
found  members  of  our  time-honored  Order,  who  are  exemplary  in  all  their
actions,  and  it  may  be  said  that  the  men  who  have  gained  a  character  among
their  fellow-citizens  for  all  that  is  noble  and  good  are  in  fact  Freemasons.  It  is,
therefore,  ungenerous  and  unjust  to  judge  the  entire  membership  of  the  frater-
nity because  of  a  few  black  sheep  having  been  admitted  into  our  Order.  There
is  nothing  that  is  good  in  morals  or  religion  which  is  not  taught  in  our  mysteries,
and  no  institution  can  have  a  better  foundation  or  better  principles  than  Free-
masonry.
THE  ANCIENT  CHARGES.
<  The  ancient  charges  afford  the  most  ample  food  for  reflection,  and  the  Free-
mason who  will  read  them  attentively  and  thoughtfully  cannot  fail  to  become
imbued  with  sentiments  which  must  necessarily  promote  his  earthly  happiness,
as  well  as  benefit  him  spiritually,  if  he  will  only  live  up  to  the  principles  which
they  enjoin.  "We  can  conceive  of  no  better  mode  for  the  brethren  to  employ
their  time,  when  not  engaged  in  actual  labor,  than  to  take  any  one  sentiment  con-
tained in  these  charges  and  make  it  the  basis  of  an  address  or  lecture,  or  eluci-
date it  in  conversational  discussion.  Take  our  word  for  it,  that  any  Lodge  which
will  act  up  to  the  above  suggestion  will  be  distinguished  for  the  correctness  of
its  work  and  its  symbolic  exemplification,  as  well  as  the  moral  rectitude  of  its
membership.  Take,  for  example,  the  following  from  the  fifth  section  of  article
six:  "You  must  also  consult  your  health,- by  not  continuing  together  too  late,
or  too  long  from  home,  after  Lodge  hours  are  past,  and  by  avoiding  of  gluttony
or  drunkenness,  that  your  families  be  not  neglected  or  injured,  nor  you  disabled
from  working."
No  one  will  question  the  soundness  or  propriety  of  the  sentiments  contained
in  the  text  just  quoted.  It  must  be  remembered  that  the  ancient  charges  em-
body the  landmarks  of  Freemasonry.    These  cannot  be  changed,  nor  should

--- Sayfa 486 ---
474  world's  masonic  register.
they  be  violated.  The  rule  of  conduct  laid  down  in  the  above  extract  is  as  ob-
ligatory upon  Freemasons  to  observe  as  what  are  termed  the  secrets  of  the
Order.  Indeed,  every  Freemason  has  obligated  himself  to  maintain  the  land-
marks of  the  Order,  and  the  above  rules  form  a  part  of  the  landmarks.  In  order
to  impress  particularly  upon  the  members  of  the  Order  the  obligation  to  observe
the  above  rules  of  conduct,  the  ancient  charges  should  be  frequently  read,  com-
mented upon  and  made  the  basis  of  Masonic  lectures.  The  extract  we  have
made  from  the  charges  can  be  elaborated  and  dilated  upon  so  as  to  add  interest
to  the  Lodge  meetings,  and  benefit  and  improve  its  membership.  "We  need  not
be  more  particular.  Will  the  brethren  try  it?  Every  Lodge  ought  to  be  a
school  of  instruction,  and  no  better  nor  more  effective  plan  can  be  adopted  than
the  one  we  have  suggested.

--- Sayfa 487 ---
world's  masonic  register.  475
USEFUL  TO  EVERY  FREEMASON.
PRO  SPKGTUS,
WILL  BE  PUBLISHED  DURING  THE  YEAR  1861,
(%  SBnrlb's  Hfas0irit  Register,
AND
Historical,  Biographical,  Chronological,  and  Statistical  Compendium.
PRICE  $3  PER  COPY,  NEATLY  BOUND.
[one  dollar  to  be  paid  at  the  time  of  subscribing.]
Each  Subscriber,  if  in  good  Masonic  standing,  will  have  his  Name,  Profession,  Residence,  the
Name  and  Number  of  the  Lodge,  Chapter,  Council,  and  Commandery  he  belongs  to ;  the
Titles  he  has  attained,  and  his  Rank  and  Position  in  the  Order,  published  in  the  book.
The  book  will  contain  complete  lists  of  all  the  Masonic  Lodges  in  the
World,  the  Name,  Number,  Locations,  and  Time  op  Meeting  of  each  Lodge,  so
far  as  known,  and  the  Name  of  the  Master  or  Secretary  of  every  Lodge  in  the
United  States  and  Canada.
Also,  the  Name,  Number,  Location,  and  Time  of  Meeting  of  every  Chapter,
Council,  and  Commandery  in  the  United  States  and  Canada.
Also,  the  Location,  Time  of  Meeting,  and  Date  of  Organization  of  every  Grand
Lodge,  Grand  Chapter,  Grand  Council,  and  Grand  Commandery;  the  Number  of
Members  in  each  jurisdiction;  the  number  Initiated,  Dimitted,  Died,  Suspended,  and
Expelled  during  the  year.
Also,  Historical  Memoranda  from  the  earliest  times ;  Biographical  Notices  of  dis-
tinguished Freemasons ;  Interesting  Events  in  the  History  of  Freemasonry  in  all
parts  of  the  world;  Records  of  Trials  and  Decisions  of  Questions  of  Masonic  Law  and
Usage;  besides  valuable  information  of  the  highest  importance  to  the  Craft.
The  book  will  contain  about  600  pages.  It  will  be  printed  in  the  best  style  of  the
typographic  art,  on  superior  paper,  and  bound  in  cloth  in  uniform  Btyle.
B@^"  The  names  and  addresses  of  Subscribers  must  be  written  in  a  plain,  legible
hand,  so  as  to  avoid  mistakes.
B@"  No  one  will  be  authorized  to  solicit  subscriptions,  without  a  certificate  signed  by
Leon  Hyneman.
Specimens  of  the  character  of  the  work  can  be  seen  at  the  offices  of  all  the  Grand
Secretaries  of  the  Grand  Lodges  in  the  United  States  and  Canada,  all  of  whom  are
authorized  to  receive  subscriptions  for  the  book.
The  price  of  the  book  will  be  Three  Dollars,  one  dollar  of  which  must  be  paid  at
the  time  of  subscribing,  and  the  remaining  two  dollars  on  delivery.  Every  Free-
mason ought  to  subscribe  for  the  "World's  Masonic  Register."
Address  LEON   HYNEMAN,
Office  of  World's  Masonic  Register,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
31

--- Sayfa 488 ---
476  world's  masonic  register.
Ella
Tlie  Best  and  the  Cheapest.
PUBLISHED  IN  TWO  VOLUMES  OF  768  PAGES  EACH.
Price  $4  per  Vol.,  neatly  Bound  in  Cloth.
This  Library  is  not  only  the  cheapest,  but  comprises  the  best  collection  of  Ma-
sonic works  published.  Some  of  the  books  contained  in  this  publication  are  not  to
be  found  in  any  other  Library.
The  Masonic  Libuaky  contains  the  following  valuable  works : —
VOLUME    I.
THE  ANTIQUITIES  OF  FREEMASONRY,
ANDERSON'S  CONSTITUTIONS,  HISTORY,  ETC.,
Embracing  the  entire  work  as  published  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  in  1723,
the  first  reprint  of  that  work  complete  since  1734.
ILLUSTRATIONS  OF  FREEMASONRY,
A  most  important  work,  without  which  no  Masonic  Library  is  complete,  and  is  a
prerequisite  to  a  complete  knowledge  of  the  history  of  Masonry  from  the  earliest
times.
HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY,
Containing  an  elaborate  history  of  the  Craft  in  England.
BOOK  OF  THE  LODGE,         MANT'S  POCKET  COMPANION,
SANDY'S  HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY.
VOLUME    II.
DERMOTT'S  AHIMAN  REZON,
With  lithographic  plate  of  the  "Arms"  of  the  operative  and  of  the  speculative  Ma.
sons;  published  in  1764,  and  not  published  in  any  other  Library.
SYMBOLIC  DICTIONARY  OF  FREEMASONRY,
HISTORY  OF  INITIATION,
In  which  the  mysteries  of  initiation  into  all  the  mystic  orders  of  the  ancient  nations
are  revealed  and  compared.
HALLIWELL'S  ANCIENT  POEM,
Supposed  to  have  been  written  no  later  than  the  fourteenth  century.
CONSTITUTIONS  OF  FREEMASONRY,
1738  edition.  This  work,  in  a  historical  point  of  view,  is  of  the  highest  value.
There  is  a  mystery  involved  in  the  Charges  which  differ  from  the  1723  edition.  This
work  is  not  published  in  any  other  Library.
CONSTITUTIONS  OF  THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  SCOTLAND.
Each  volume  is  complete  in  itself.
Address  LEON  HTNEMAN,  Publisher,
Masonic  Libeabt  Office,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

--- Sayfa 489 ---
ENGLAND.
GRAND   LODGE   OF  ENGLAND.
Freemasonry  no  doubt  existed  in  Britain  before  the  Roman  invasion.  There  is
abundant  reliable  historical  and  other  documentary  evidence  showing  its  estab-
lishment and  subsequent  progress  and  extension.  The  first  Grand  Lodge  was
established  in  926,  by  Edwin,  brother  to  Athelstane,  the  then  reigning  monarch.
King  Athelstane  granted  a  charter  to  his  brother  Edwin,  empowering  the  frater-
nity to  assemble  annually  at  York.  This  Grand  Lodge  exercised  jurisdiction  over
all  England,  and  the  fraternity  universally  acknowledged  allegiance  to  it.  The
City  of  York  was  at  that  time  the  metropolis  of  England,  and  it  was  conceded  to
be  the  original  seat  of  Masonic  government — no  other  place  pretended  to  claim
it.  The  Grand  Lodge  was  held  in  the  highest  veneration,  and  every  Mason  in
the  kingdom  considered  himself  bound  by  the  charges  which  originally  sprung
from  that  body.  "To  be  ranked,"  Preston  remarks,  in  1772,  "as  descendants  of
the  original  York  Masons,  was  the  glory  and  boast  of  the  brethren  in  almost
every  country  where  Masonry  has  been  regularly  established;  and  from  the  prev-
alence and  universality  of  the  idea  that  in  the  City  of  York  Masonry  was  first
authorized  by  charter,  the  Masons  of  England  have  received  tribute  from  the
first  States  in  Europe."  The  Grand  Lodge  at  York  continued  to  hold  supreme
jurisdiction  in  England,  and  its  authority  was  universally  recognized,  until  in
the  fifteenth  century,  the  Craft  in  London,  where  they  had  become  numerous,
also  became  ambitious  to  have  the  seat  of  Masonic  government  transferred
from  the  City  of  York  to  the  City  of  London.  It  appears  that  in  consequence
of  certain  demands,  a  Grand  Master  was  "appointed"  for  the  South  of  Eng-
land, in  1567.  "What  the  nature  of  these  demands  were,  or  why  a  Grand  Mas-
ter was  appointed  for  the  South  of  England  (by  which  is  understood  the  district
embracing  the  City  of  London)  can  only  be  inferred  from  what  Preston  says,
and  the  subsequent  history  of  the  London  Freemasons.  Preston,  in  his  "Illus-
trations of  Masonry,"  has  an  article  under  the  caption  '-Ancient  Historical
Records  of  Masonry,"  which  refers  to  an  invasion  of  the  rights  of  the  York
Grand  Lodge,  from  which  we  copy  the  following :  "As  the  constitutions  of  the
English  Lodges  are  derived  from  this  General  Assembly  at  York— as  all  Ma-
sons are  bound  to  observe  and.  preserve  those  in  all  time  coming — and  as  there
is  no  satisfactory  proof  that  such  assembly  was  ever  regularly  removed  by  the
resolution  of  its  members,  but  that,  on  the  contrary,  the  fraternity  still  continue
to  meet  in  that  city  under  this  appellation,  it  may  remain  a  doubt  whether,  while
those  constitutions  exist  as  the  standard  of  Masonic  conduct,  that  Assembly  may
not  justly  claim  the  allegiance  to  which  their  original  authority  entitled  them ;
and  whether  any  other  convention  of  Masons,  however  great  their  consequence
may  be,  can,  consistently  with  those  constitutions,  withdraw  their  allegiance  from
(477)

--- Sayfa 490 ---
478  world's  masonic  register
that  Assembly,  or  set  aside  an  authority  to  which  not  only  antiquity,  but  the
concurrent  approbation  of  Masons  for  ages,  under  the  most  solemn  engage-
ments, have  repeatedly  given  a  sanction.
"  It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  idea  of  superiority,  and  a  wish  to  acquire  abso-
lute dominion,  should  occasion  a  contest  among  Masons.  Were  the  principles
of  the  Order  better  understood,  and  more  generally  practiced,  the  intention  of
the  institution  would  be  more  fully  answered.  Every  Mason  would  consider  his
brother  as  his  fellow,  and  he  who,  by  generous  and  virtuous  actions,  could  best
promote  the  happiness  of  society,  would  always  be  most  likely  to  receive  homage
and  respect."
It  is  singular  that  Dr.  Oliver,  in  his  reprint  of  Preston,  omits  the  whole  of  the
two  paragraphs  just  quoted.  Preston,  however,  with  the  records  before  him,
and  understanding  the  whole  of  the  question,  gives  a  plain  intimation  why  a
Grand  Master  was  appointed  for  the  South  of  England,  and  the  motives  that
influenced  the  Craft  in  London  in  their -subsequent  aggression  and  usurpation  of
the  powers  vested  in  the  Grand  Lodge  at  York.  The  Grand  Master,  appointed
in  1567  for  the  South  of  England,  was  Sir  Thomas  Gresham,  an  eminent  and
wealthy  merchant.  Preston  says:  "Notwithstanding  this  new  appointment  of
a  Grand  Master  for  the  South,  the  General  Assembly  continued  to  meet  in  the
City  of  York  as  heretofore,  where  all  the  records  were  kept ;  and  to  this  As-
sembly appeals  were  made  on  every  important  occasion."  The  brethren  in  Lon-
don having  obtained  the  appointment  of  a  Grand  Master  in  1567,  aspired  to
other  powers.  Thus  we  find  that  in  the  year  1603,  in  the  reign  of  James  I.,
Inigo  Jones  was  "  nominated  Grand  Master  of  England,"  in  contradistinction
to  the  Grand  Master  of  the  Grand  Lodge  at  York,  who  bore  the  title  of  "The
Grand  Master  of  all  England;"  and  the  records  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Eng-
land show  that  he,  Inigo  Jones,  according  with  the  views  of  the  London  Masons,
exercised  all  the  powers  of  a  Grand  Master,  as  though  the  York  Grand  Lodge  did
not  exist,  and  held  "  Quarterly  Communications  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Masters
and  "Wardens,  and  the  Annual  General  Assembly,  and  Feast  on  St.  John's  Day,
when  he  was  anoually  rechosen  until  a.d.  1618."  The  questions  arise,  where
did  he  get  his  authority  to  hold  Quarterly  Communications  and  Annual  General
Assemblies?  or,  were  the  exercises  of  these  powers  usurped?  In  the  year  1663,
at  a  General  Assembly,  held  December  twenty-seventh,  Henry  Jermyn,  Earl  of
St.  Alban's,  was  elected  Grand  Master.  He  appointed  Christopher  Wren  as  one
of  his  Wardens.  At  this  Assembly  six  regulations  were  adopted :  see  p.  40  of
this  volume.  All  of  these  regulations,  notwithstanding  their  Masonic  charac-
ter, were  revolutionary  in  spirit  and  intent,  considering  the  relations  this  body
held  to  the  Grand  Lodge  at  York.  The  fifth  regulation  entirely  ignores  the  ex-
istence of  the  parent  Grand  Lodge,  the  Grand  Lodge  at  York,  and  were  adopted
to  give  the  appearance  of  law  to  usurped  powers,  and  as  a  cover  to  their  con-
templated rebellion,  which  had  for  its  aim  an  independent  Masonic  sovereignty.
It  is  to  be  regretted  that  the  Grand  Lodge  at  York  never  published  any  of  its
transactions ;  all  our  information  is  derived  from  historical  memoranda,  and  from
the  publications  of  the  present  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  and  writers  holding
membership  under  the  latter  body,  consequently  the  data  may  be  implicitly  re-
lied upon  as  correct  in  every  particular.  The  adoption  of  this  regulation  was
no  doubt  the  incipient  step  toward  throwing  off  altogether  their  allegiance  to

--- Sayfa 491 ---
ENGLAND.  479
the  Grand  Lodge  at  York,  which  the  Masons  in  London  accomplished  in  1717.
The  history  of  the  Order  for  the  preceding  fifty  years  is  very  meagre.  It  is
known  that  Christopher  Wren  commenced  his  Masonic  career  in  1660,  at  which
time  he  was  twenty-eight  years  of  age.  As  stated  above,  he  was  appointed
Senior  Grand  Warden  in  1663,  and  he  finally  was  chosen  Grand  Master,  and
was  continued  in  office  until  he  attained  a  very  great  age.  His  devotion  to  the
interests  of  the  fraternity  is  well  established.  It  may  be  fairly  inferred  that  he
was  not  favorable  to  the  revolutionary  spirit  that  was  manifested  among  the
Masons  in  London,  and  in  consequence  of  which  he  was  displaced  as  chief
Architect  to  the  Crown,  and  a  Mr.  William  Benson,  a  man  of  much  inferior  skill,
appointed  in  his  place.  How  much  influence  Dr.  Anderson  and  other  Masons
in  London  had  in  this  movement,  may  be  inferred  by  implication.  Dr.  Ander-
son tells  us  "that  Sir  Christopher  Wren  neglected  the  Lodges,  and  that  this  was
the  cause  of  the  great  falling  off  of  the  Masons."  Dr.  Anderson  and  the  mem-
bers of  the  independent  Grand  Lodge  took  every  pains  to  give  the  impression
that  there  were  but  few  Lodges  at  work  at  that  particular  time — that  there  was
a  great  falling  off  of  the  Masons — and  that  this  state  of  things  was  owing  to  Sir
Christopher  Wren's  neglecting  to  attend  to  his  proper  official  duties.  The  motive
for  giving  publicity  to  such  statements  will  be  obvious  to  every  impartial,  intel-
ligent Freemason,  as  they  are  not  borne  out  by  facts.
In  1695,  King  William  was  privately  initiated  into  Freemasonry,  and  he
approved  the  choice  of  Sir  Christopher  as  Grand  Master.  At  a  General
Assembly  and  feast  in  1697,  many  persons  of  eminence  were  present,  and
Charles,  Duke  of  Richmond  and  Lennox,  was  proposed  and  elected  Grand
.  Master,  who  appointed  Sir  Christopher  his  Deputy.  His  Grace  continued  in
office  only  one  year,  and  was  succeeded  by  Sir  Christopher,  who  continued  at
the  head  of  the  fraternity  at  least  until  the  completion  of  St.  Paul's,  in  1710.
There  are  sufficient  evidences  in  addition  to  his  labors  to  prove  that  Sir  Christo-
pher Wren  was  an  active  man,  vigorous  in  body  and  mind.  It  is  possible  that
he  felt  keenly  the  insult  of  being  displaced  after  having  for  more  than  fifty  years
faithfully  executed,  and  with  great  skill  and  ability,  every  trust  committed  to
him,  for  a  mere  pretender,  and  consequently  did  not  take  as  lively  an  interest
in  attending  the  Assemblies  of  the  Craft ;  or  more  probably,  he  may  have  felt
that  a  schismatic  sentiment  was  gaining  ground,  which  he  was  unwilling  to
fellowship  with,  and  which  he  was  unable  to  arrest  or  overcome.  The  intimation
is  plainly  given  by  Dr.  Anderson,  Dr.  Desaguliers,  and  other  distinguished
members  of  the  Order,  who  formed  the  Grand  Lodge  in  1717,  that  the  four
Lodges,  the  old  Lodge  of  St.  Paul,  held  at  the  Goose  and  Gridiron ;  the  old
Lodge,  No.  2",  held  at  the  Crown,  which  two  or  three  years  afterward  became
extinct;  the  old  Lodge,  No.  3,  held  at  the  Apple-Tree  Tavern,  which  also
survived  only  a  few  years,  on  account  of  disagreements  between  the  members  ;
and  Lodge,  No.  4,  held  at  the  Rummer  and  Grapes  Tavern,  were  the  only
Lodges  at  that  time  in  England ;  but  that  was  an  erroneous  impression,  con-
veyed for  the  purpose  of  justifying  them  in  the  formation  of  an  independent
Grand  Lodge.  It  is  a  well-established  fact  that  Freemasonry  attained  a  very
high  decree  of  eminence  in  the  time  of  Sir  Christopher  Wren,  that  the  Lodges
were  numerous  and  the  Craft  in  a  flourishing  condition.  The  truth  is  as  stated
by  Sandy,  p.  55,  that  "in  the  beginning  of  the  reign  of  George  the  First,  an

--- Sayfa 492 ---
480  world's  masonic  register.
unfortunate  schism  arose  in  the  Society,"  in  consequence  of  Sir  Christopher
Wren  having  been  superseded  by  Mr.  Wm.  Benson.  This  schism  was  kept  up
until  1717,  when  the  Grand  Lodge  was  formed,  and  afterward.  Who  were  the
schismatics?  Certainly  not  Sir  Christopher  and  the  Craft  who  adhered  to  him.
Sandy  also  remarks  :  "About  the  year  1717,  Dr.  Desaguliers,  who  was  Grand
Master  in  1719,  a  man  of  considerable  scientific  attainments,  with  other  men  of
talent,  took  considerable  pains  in  arranging  and  modeling  that  system  of
Freemasonry  which,  prior  to  the  memorable  union  in  1813,  was  recognized  in
London,  in  opposition  to  what  was  then  called  Ancient  Masonry,  and  certain
peculiar  toasts  and  ceremonies  were  introduced  at  his  installation  feast."  *  *  *
p.  56.  "  The  Ancient  Masons,  as  they  were  called,  chiefly  assembled  in  the
country,  after  the  schism  in  the  time  of  Sir  Christopher  Wren."  It  is  evident
from  the  extracts  just  quoted,  that  the  schismatics  Anderson  and  Desaguliers,
after  the  organization  of  the  Grand  Lodge  and  before,  introduced  innovations
which  the  true  members  of  the  Craft  would  not  recognize.
The  Grand  Lodge,  however,  was  successful  in  its  revolution,  and  its  origina-
tors were  by  no  means  scrupulous  in  assuming  unlawful  powers — invading  the
jurisdiction  of  the  mother  Grand  Lodge,  and  under  the  very  shadow  of  its
temple  aiding  and  abetting  rebellion.  We  quote  from  Preston :  "  A  few  brethren
at  York  having,  on  some  trivial  occasion,  seceded  from  their  ancient  Lodge,  they
applied  to  London  for  a  warrant  of  constitution,  and,  without  inquiry  into  the
merits  of  the  case,  their  application  was  honored.  Instead  of  being  recom-
mended to  the  mother  Lodge  to  be  restored  to  favor,  these  brethren  were  en-
couraged in  their  revolt,  and  permitted,  under  the  banner  of  the  Grand  Lodge
at  London,  to  open  a  new  Lodge  in  the  City  of  York  itself."  A  short  time
after  the  above  flagrant  outrage,  the  London  Grand  Lodge  again  invaded  the
jurisdiction  of  the  York  Grand  Lodge.  We  copy  again  from  Preston :  "  The
Earl  of  Crawford,  1734,  seems  to  have  made  another  encroachment  on  the  juris-
diction of  the  Grand  Lodge  at  York,  by  constituting  two  Lodges  within  their
district,  and  by  granting,  without  their  consent)  three  deputations."  The  London
Grand  Lodge  in  1738  published  a  second  book  of  Constitutions,  differing  mate-
rially in  the  organic  laws  of  Masonry  from  those  published  in  1723.  In  this
book  of  1738,  after  enumerating  a  list  of  names  as  Provincial  Grand  Masters
appointed  for  different  places  abroad,  they  say:  "All  these  foreign  Lodges  are
under  the  patronage  of  our  Grand  Master  of  England  ;  but  the  old  Lodge  at
York  City,  and  the  Lodges  of  Scotland,  Ireland,  France,  and  Italy,  affecting
independencies,  are  under  their  own  Grand  Masters."  '-Affecting  independen-
cies !"  Consistent  Grand  Lodge  of  schismatics  !  They  would  not  bow  the  knee
to  Baal — they  would  not  recognize  a  body  of  revolutionists,  but  "because  they
adhered  to  their  legitimate  organization,  they  "affected  independency  I"  A
third  encroachment  on  the  jurisdiction  of  the  Grand  Lodge  at  York  was  made
in  1738,  by  Carnarvon,  Grand  Master,  by  the  appointment  of  a  Provincial  Grand
Master  for  the  West  Riding  of  Yorkshire.  This  latter  encroachment,  Preston
remarks,  "  so  widened  the  breach  between  the  brethren  in  the  North  and  South
of  England,  that  thenceforward  all  future  correspondence  between  the  Grand
Lodges  totally  ceased."
The  London  Grand  Lodge,  on  the  24th  of  June,  1723,  adopted  the  following
resolution,  (ed.  1738,  p.  175,  and  Masonic  Library,  vol.  ii.  p.  659  :)  "That  it  is

--- Sayfa 493 ---
ENGLAND.  481
not  in  the  power  of  any  man,  or  body  of  men,  to  make  any  alteration  or  innova-
tion in  the  body  of  Masonry,  without  the  consent  first  being  obtained  of  the
Grand  Lodge."  This  resolution  of  the  Grand  Lodge  is  either  not  generally
known,  or  those  who  believe  in  the  legality  of  the  formation  of  the  new  Grand
Lodge,  think  it  best  not  to  mention  it.  The  resolution,  however,  was  offered
and  adopted  by  the  Grand  Lodge.  It  would  hardly  be  worth  while  asking  the
question,  If  a  Grand  Lodge  ought  to  be  recognized,  and  fellowship  held  with
its  members,  that  would  declare  that  innovations  in  the  body  of  Masonry  could
be  made  if  the  Grand  Lodge  consented  to  it  ?  The  friends  of  Anderson  of  1723
will  please  make  a  note  of  this  resolution.
Preston,  in  commenting  upon  the  illegal  invasion  of  the  jurisdiction  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  York,  by  the  London  Grand  Lodge,  says :  "  It  is  much  to  be
regretted  that  any  separate  interests  should  have  destroyed  the  social  intercourse
of  Masons  :  but  it  is  no  less  remarkable  than  true,  that  the  brethren  in  the  North
and  those  in  the  South  are  now  in  a  manner  unknown  to  each  other.  Notwith-
standing the  pitch  of  eminence  and  splendor  at  which  the  Grand  Lodge  in
London  has  arrived,  neither  the  Lodges  of  Scotland  nor  Ireland  court  its  corre-
spondence."
"  This  unfortunate  circumstance  has  been  attributed  to  the  introduction  of  a
few  modern  innovations  among  the  Lodges  in  the  South."  It  is  a  well-estab-
lished fact  that  the  Lodges  in  London  did  make  some  innovations  about  this
time,  and  hence  the  term  "  modern,"  which  was  applied  to  them,  and  rightfully,
by  the  true  body  of  Masons.
Our  limits  will  not  justify  us  in  pursuing  our  investigations.  It  is  certain
that  the  origin  of  the  Grand  Lodge  formed  in  1717  has  been  greatly  misunder-
stood. The  acts  of  aggression  upon  the  rights  of  the  parent  Grand  Lodge,
commenced  nearly  two  centuries  before,  resulted  in  throwing  off  their  allegiance
altogether,  and  forming  an  independent  Grand  Lodge.  The  City  of  London
had  grown  to  a  vast  metropolis.  The  Craft  were  unwilling  to  be  subordinate  to
a  body  located  in  a  small  city  in  the  interior  of  the  country.  Besides,  old  Craft
Masonry  did  not  suit  their  progressive  notions.  At  the  Assembly  and  Feast,
June  24th,  1718,  it  was  desired  of  the  brethren  "  to  bring  to  the  Grand  Lodge
any  old  writings  and  records  concerning  Masons  and  Masonry,  in  order  to  show
the  usages  in  ancient  times  ;  and  this  year  several  old  copies  of  the  Gothic  Con-
stitutions were  produced  and  collated."  On  the  29th  of  September,  1721,  the
Grand  Master  and  the  Lodge,  "finding  fault  with  all  the  copies  of  the  old
Gothic  Constitutions,  ordered  Brother  James  Anderson,  A.  M.,  to  digest  the
same  in  a  new  and  better  method."  On  the  27th  of  December,  1721,  "  fourteen
learned  brothers  were  appointed  to  examine  Brother  Anderson's  manuscript,
and  to  make  report."  At  the  Grand  Lodge,  25th  of  March,  1722,  "  the  said
committee  of  fourteen  reported  that  they  had  perused  Brother  Anderson's
manuscript,  viz. :  "  The  History,  Charges,  Eegulations,  and  Master's  Song,  and,
after  some  amendments,  had  approved  of  it."  This  book  of  constitutions,  after
being  amended,  altered,  changed,  etc.,  in  committees  and  by  the  Grand  Lodge,
was  approved  on  the  17th  of  January,  1723 ;  and  from  the  above  history  and
extracts,  an  opinion  may  be  formed  as  to  the  truthfulness  of  the  document,  and
agreement  of  the  so-called  Anderson's  Constitutions  with  the  ancient  Gothic
Constitution,  containing  the  true  and  ancient  laws  and  usages  of  the  fraternity.

--- Sayfa 494 ---
482  world's  masonic  register.
As  the  York  Grand  Lodge  did  not  take  any  public  notice  of  the  schismatics,
and  as  the  latter  body  gave  public  notoriety  to  all  of  its  transactions,  it  was
successful  in  establishing  and  multiplying  Lodges.  There  were  at  the  time  of
the  organization  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  in  1717,  many  Lodges  holding  under  the
York  Constitutions  in  London,  and  throughout  England,  which  had  to  succumb
to  the  popularity  of  the  new  Grand  Lodge.  The  Grand  Lodges  of  Scotland  and
Ireland  refused,  in  common  with  the  York  Grand  Lodge,  to  fellowship  with  or
countenance  the  new  Grand  Lodge,  which  had  not  only  innovated  upon  the
Landmarks  of  Freemasonry,  but  altered  and  changed  the  ancient  laws  and
charges.-  In  1738,  James  Anderson,  by  direction  of  the  Grand  Lodge,  pre-
pared a  new  book  of  Constitutions,  in  which  the  "  Ancient  Charges"  differ  very
materially  from  the  ancient  charges  published  in  the  1723  edition.  These  latter
charges  are  generally  accredited  to  Laurence  Dermott,  who,  in  1756,  eighteen
years  later,  published  an  Ahimau  Rezon,  in  which  he  copied  the  1738  ancient
charges  of  Anderson  verbatim.  If  we  were  to  express  an  opinion  why  Ander-
son, in  1738,  published  a  code  of  charges  different  in  constitutional  and  Masonic
principles  from  those  published  in  1723,  we  would  say  that  as  at  that  time  (1738)
the  York  Grand  Lodge  began  to  show  an  outward  opposition  to  the  new  estab-
lishment, and,  as  it  had  right  on  its  side,  public  opinion  was  with  it,  the  new
Grand  Lodge  was  in  a  manner  impelled  to  declare  a  code  of  charges  more  in
consonance  with  ancient  established  usages,  and  which  accorded  with  those
practiced  by  the  York  Grand  Lodge.  This  history  might  be  extended  through
some  volumes  from  published  data  of  the  last  century,  and  particularly  from  the
records  of  the  new  Grand  Lodge,  showing  more  clearly  than  we  have,  in  the
limited  space  at  our  command,  the  illegality  of  the  Grand  Lodge  formed  in  1717,
its  previous  aggressions  and  its  continued  and  subsequent  innovations  upon  the
body  of  Masonry,  which  it  claimed  the  right  to  make  by  its  resolution  of  June
24th,  1723 ;  but  as  the  history  of  the  formation  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England
in  1717  has  not  yet  been  written,  and  as  the  Ancient  Grand  Lodge  at  York  from
1717  has  been  almost  totally  ignored  by  all  Masonic  writers,  we  leave  the  task
to  the  future  historian,  satisfied  with  having  thrown  out  some  hints,  not  hereto-
fore noticed,  for  his  guidance.
SUBORDINATE  LODGES.
Lodges  with  the  *  prefixed  have  Chapters  attached  also.
No.  Lodge.  Location.  Time  of  Meeting.
Grand  Stewards',  Freemasons'  Tavern,  London.  3d  Wednesday.
1     Grand  Masters',  "  "  3d  Monday.
2*  Antiquity,  "  "  4th  Wednesday.
3*  Fidelity,  ■<  <•  2d  Wednesday.
4     R.Somerset-ho.  &  Inverness,  "  "  4th  Monday.
5*  St. George's  &  Corner-stone,  "  "     .  2d  Monday.
6*  Friendship,  Thatched-house  Tavern, London. 2d  Thursday.
7*  E.  York  of  Perseverance,    Freemasons'  Tavern,  London.  3d  Wednesday.
8*  British,  «  «  3(j  Monday.
9*  Albion,  «  .<  ]sti  Tuesday.
10     Westminster  &  Keystone,  "  "  lst  Thursday.

--- Sayfa 495 ---
ENGLAND.
483
No.
Lodge.
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
11*  Enoch,  Freemasons'  Tavern,  London.
12*  Fortitude &01dCumberland,  "  "
13*  Union  Waterloo,  "  "
Three  Tuns  Tavern,  Southwark,
14 Tuscan,
15
Kent,
16 Boyal  Alpha,
18 Old  Dundee,
19 Boyal  Athelstan,
20*  E.  Kent  of  Antiquity,
21*  Emulation,
22 Neptune,
23
Globe,
24*  Newcastle-upon-Tyne,
25*  Kobert  Burns,
27
Castle  of  Harmony,
29 Egyptian,
30*  Old  King's  Arms,
32*  St.  Alban's,
33
United  Mariners',
34
United  Industrious,
35*  St  George's,
38 Britannic,
40 Mount  Moriah,
41
Medina,
43*
Glamorgan,
44*  Anchor  &  Hope,
45
Union,
46*  St.  John  Baptist,
47*
Derwent,
48*
Boyal  Cumberland,
49*  Concord,
50*  Belief,
51
St.  Paul's,
52
Friendship,
53*
'  Strong  Man,
54*  Old  Union,
55 Newstead,
56 Industry,
57*  Gihon,
58 Knights  of  Malta,
59
Angel,
60 Union,
■61* '  Boyal  Sussex,
62*
'  Hope,
63*  Constitutional,
2d  Wednesday.
2d  Monday.
2d  Wednesday.
4th  Tuesday.
2d
Wednesday.
1st  Tuesday.
2d  Wednesday.
2d  Wednesday.
3d  Monday.
Last  Thursday.
3d  Thursday.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
1st  Monday.
London.
Freemasons'  Tavern,  London.
London  Tavern,  London.
George  &  Blue  Boar,  London.
Sun  Tavern,  Chatham.
Albion  Tavern,  London.
Kadley's  Hotel,  London.
Freemasons'  Tavern,  London.
Freemasons'  Hall,  Newcastle.
Freemasons'  Tavern,  London.
Thatched-house  Tavern,London.4th  Monday.
George  &  Blue  Boar,  Holborn,
London.  1st  Thursday.
Freemasons'  Tavern,  London.     4th  Monday.
London  Coffee  House,  London.  2d  Monday.
Three  Tuns  Tavern,  London.      3d  Wednesday.
Canterbury.  1st  Thursday.
Adelphi  Hotel,  Liverpool.  4th  Wednesday.
Thatched-house  Tavern,London.2d  Friday.
Freemasons'  Tavern,  London.     4th  Wednesday.
85  High  Street,  Cowes.
St.  Mary  Street,  Cardiff.
Bolton-le-Moors.
Chichester.
Masonic  Hall,  Exeter.
Swan  Hotel,  Hastings.
Corridor  Booms,  Bath.
London.
Bury,  Lancashire.
Union  Hotel,  Birmingham.
Waterloo  Hotel,  Manchester.
Falcon  Tavern,  London.
Badley's  Hotel,  London.
Assembly  Booms,  Nottingham.  1st  &  3d  Monday.
Thursday  near  f.  m.
2d  Monday.
1st  Thursday.
1st  Monday.
Last  Thursday.
2d  Monday.
1st  Thursday.
Thursday  near  f.  m.
Last  Monday.
1st  Tuesday.
1st  Thursday.
3d  Tuesday.
Gateshead,  Durham.
Southwark,  London.
Leicestershire.
Colchester.
Norfolk  Hotel,  Norwich.
New  Masonic  Hall,  Bath.
Spread  Eagle,  Kochdale.
Ship  &  Turtle,  London.
64*  Howard  of  Brotherly  Love.Norfolk  Arms,  Arundel.
65*  Humber,      ,  Freemasons'  Hall,  Hull.
4th  Monday.
3d  Thursday.
Last  Wednesday.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Tuesday.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
3d  Thursday.
3d  Tuesday.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.

--- Sayfa 496 ---
484
world's  masonio  register.
Time  of  Meeting.
66  Felicity,
67  Loyal  Vacation,
70    Eoyal  Naval,
72     Peace  &  Harmony,
73*  Probity,
75*  Social,
76  St.  Mary's,
77  Fortitude,
78  Prosperity,
79  Grenadiers',
81*  Royal  Clarence,
82     Unity,
83*  St.  John's,
84  Unity,
85  Eoyal  Jubilee,
87  Mount  Lebanon,
88  Athol,
89*  Love  and  Honour,
90*  Economy,
91*  Freedom,
92*  Imperial  George,
93     Pythagorean,
95     St.  John's,
96*  Dorio,
97*  Foundation,
98*  United  Prudence,
99*  Doyle's  Fellowship,
100     Faithful,
101*  Loyalty,
103     Vitruvian,
105*  Scientific,
106*  Unanimity,
107  St.  John's,
108  Regularity,
109*  Moira,
110     Social,
111*  Phtfinix,
112  Eastern  Star,
113  Burlington,
114*  Palatine,
115*  St.  Martin's,
116  Shakspeare,
117  Friendship,
118  Temple,
119  Unanimity,
120*  Beaufort,
121     St.  John's,
122*  Fortitude,
123*  Sun,
London  Tavern,  London.
Dulverton,  Somerset.
Freemasons'  Tavern,  London.
London  Tavern,  London.
Halifax,  York.
Queen's  Hotel,  Manchester.
Freemasons'  Tavern,  London.
Near  Rochdale.
White  Hart  Tavern,  London.
Freemasons'  Tavern,  London.
Freemasons'  Hall,  Bristol.
London  Tavern,  London.
Masonic  Hall,  Plymouth.
Suffolk  Hotel,  Lowestoft.
London.
Green  Man  Tavern,  London.
Masonic  Hall,  Birmingham.
Boyal  Hotel,  Falmouth.
Black  Swan  Inn,  Winchester.
Town  Hall,  Gravesend.
Ashton  Arms  Inn,  Lancashire.
Globe  Tavern,  Greenwich.
Phoenix  Hall,  Sunderland.
Woodbridge,  Suffolk.
Cheltenham,  Gloucester.
Albion  Tavern,  London.
Masonic  Hall,  Guernsey.
Exchange  Rooms,  Norfolk.
Lancashire.
White  Hart  Tavern,  Lambeth.
Eed  Lion  Inn,  Cambridge.
Astley  Arms  Inn,  Cheshire.
Eadley's  Hotel,  London.
Freemasons'  Tavern,  London.
London  Tavern,  London.
Eoyal  Hotel,  Norwich.
Phoenix  Hall,  Sunderland.
New  Globe  Tavern,  London.
Albion  Tavern,  London.
Bridge  Inn,  Bishop  Wearmouth
Assembly  Rooms,  Burslem.
Albion  Tavern,  London.
Duke's  Hotel,  Great  Yarmouth.
Ship  &  Turtle,  London.
King's  Arms  Inn,  Norfolk.
Freemasons'  Hall,  Bristol.
Underbank,  Stockport.
Stonehouse.
Exmouth,  Devonshire.
3d  Tuesday.
2d  Monday.
4th  Thursday.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Last  Monday.
3d  Thursday.
Thursday  after  f.  m.
4th  Wednesday.
4th  Thursday.
2d,  4th,  &  5th  Mons.
1st  Monday.
1st  Tuesday.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Monday.
3d  Tuesday.
1st  Wednesday.
2d  Monday.
Last  Wednesday.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Thursday  after  f.  m.
Last  Monday.
2d  Tuesday.
1st  Wednesday.
1st  Wednesday.
Last  Tuesday.
2d  Tuesday.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
2d  Wednesday.
2d  Monday.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Monday.
2d  Thursday.
4th  Tuesday.
2d  Tuesday.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
2d  Wednesday.
2d  Tuesday.
2d  &  4th  Thursdays.
Thursday  n.  f.  m.
4th  Thursday.
1st  Wednesday
1st  Tuesday.
Monday  near  f.  m.
1st,  3d,  &  5th  Tues.
2d  Monday.
2d  Wednesday.
2d  Monday.

--- Sayfa 497 ---
ENGLAND.
485
No.
Location.
Time  of  Meettno.
124  Philanthropic,
125  London,
127*  Loyal  Cambrian,
128*  Restoration,
129*  St.  George's,
130*  Unanimity,
131     British  Union,
133*  Royal  Lancashire,
135    Salopian  Charity,
138     Grapes  Inn,
141*  Palladian,
142*  Mount  Sinai,
143  Derbyshire,
144  Lennox,
146*  Granby,
147     Prince  Edwin's,
148*  Silent  Temple,
149*  Union,
150*  Prince  Edwin's,
151*  Union,
152  Royal  Gloster,
153  Fortitude,
154  Unity,
155  Harmony,
156  Caledonian,
157*  Perpetual  Friendship,
158    Good  Report,
160*  Amity,
161*  All  Saints,
162*  Britannia,
164  St.  George's,
165  Faith,
166  St.  Thomas's,
167  Middlesex,
168  St.  Luke's,
169*  Prudent  Brethren,
170*  Antiquity,
172    Justice,
173*  Lights,
174    Peace,
176*  Albany,
177*  Virtue,
179*  Unanimity,
181*  Perseverance,
182  Harmony,
183  Bedford,
184*  Adam's,
185    Brunswick,
Globe  Hotel,  Lynn.
Freemasons'  Tavern,  London.
Merthyr  Tydvil.
Town  Hall,  Darlington.
Masonic  Hall,  Exeter.
Stanley  Arms  Inn,  Preston.
White  Horse  Tavern,  Ipswich.
Swan  Hotel,  Colne.
Lion  Hotel,  Shrewsbury.
Whitehaven.
Green  Dragon  Hotel,  Hereford.
Union  Hotel,  Penzance.
Longnor,  Staffordshire.
Richmond,  Yorkshire.
Freemasons'  Hall,  Durham.
Hythe,  Kent.
Cross  Keys,  Burnley.
King's  Head  Hotel,  Margate.
Bury,  Lancashire.
Kendal.
Southampton.
Globe  Inn,  Truro.
Ringwood,  Hants.
Ship,  Feversham.
Ship  &  Turtle,  London.
Lamb  Inn,  Bridgewater.
Radley's  Hotel,  London.
Thames  Street,  Poole.
Sun  Inn,  Northumberland.
Music  Hall,  Sheffield.
Royal-hill,  Greenwich.
Anderton's  Hotel,  London.
■  Freemasons'  Tavern,  London.
Thatched-houseTavern.London
Commercial  Hall  Tavern,  Chel
sea.
Freemasons'  Tavern,  London.
Bolton-le-Moors.
Royal  Albert,  Deptford.
Warrington.
Meltham,  Yorkshire.
Newport,  Isle  of  Wight.
Manchester.
Wakefield,  Yorkshire.
Masonic  Temple,  Liverpool.
White  Swan  Inn,  Plymouth.
Freemasons'  Tavern,  London.
Masonic  Hall,  Sheerness.
Masonic  Hall,  Plymouth.
1st  Monday.
1st  Saturday.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
Last  Thursday.
2d  Thursday.
1st  Tuesday.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thur.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Weds.
1st  Monday.
1st  Tuesday.
3d  Tuesday.
1st  Friday.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Wednesday  n.  f.  m.
Tnes.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
Wednesday  n.  f.  m.
2d  Tuesday.
2d  &  4th  Thursdays.
2d  Tuesday.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
2d  Friday.
1st  Monday.
1st  Thursday.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
2d  Thursday.
3d  Wednesday.
Last  Tuesday.
1st  Saturday.
.3d  Friday.
1st  Monday.
4th  Tuesday.
2d  Wednesday.
2d  Wednesday.
Last  Monday.
Saturday  after  f.  m.
Wed.  near  f.  m.
3d  Tuesday.
1st  Monday.
2d  Wednesday.
1st  Monday.
2d  Friday.
1st  Tuesday.
1st  Wednesday.

--- Sayfa 498 ---
486
world's  masonic  register.
Lodge.
Time  of  Meeting.
186*  True  Friendship,
188     Cadogim,
189*  Integrity,
190     Perseverance,
194  Honor  &  Generosity,
195  Union,
196*  St.  John's,
197  Mariner's,
198  Temperance,
199*  All  Souls,
200  Amity,
201  Old  Concord,
202  Phoenix,
203  Sincerity,
204*  East  Medina,
205    Caveac,
206*  Domatic,
207*  Antiquity,
209     Manchester,
211*  St.  James's  Union,
212    Universal,
215  Unity,
216  United  Chatham,
218*  Tranquillity,
219     Industry,
221*  E.  Sussex  Hospitality,
223*  Joppa,
224*  Sincerity,
225  Oak,
226  St.  John,
227  Lion  &  Lamb,
228  Confidence,
229  St.  Paul's,
230  Hengist,
233*  Jerusalem,
234  Percy,
235  Peace  &  Harmony,
236*  Old  Globe,
237    Jordan,
238*  Friendship,
245*  Ancient  Union,
246*  Caledonian,
247    Israel,
248*  Friendship,
251*  Three  Grand  Principles,
252    Etonian,
254*  Duke  of  Athol,
255     St.  Michael's,
257     Euphrates,
Old  Ship,  Rochford.
Freemasons'  Tavern,  London.
Manchester.
Sidmouth.
London  Tavern,  London.
tt  it  it
Hampstead.
Guernsey.
Rotherhithe,  London.
Weymouth.
Greenwich,  London.
Freemasons'  Tavern,  London.
tt  it  (*
Cheshire  Cheese  Tavern,London
Ryde,  Isle  of  Wight.
Ealing,  London.
Fetter  Lane,  London.
Wigan,  Lancashire.
Pimlico,  London.
Freemasons'  Tavern,  London.
a  tt  tt
London  Tavern,  London.
Brompton,  Kent.
Bridge  House  Hotel,  London.
Dick's  Coffee  House,  London.
Freemasons'  Hall,  Bristol.
Albion  Tavern,  London.
East  Stonehouse.
Radley's  Hotel,  London.
Bury,  Lancashire.
Bridge  House  Hotel,  London.
Anderton's  Hotel,  Loudon.
London  Coffee  House,  London.
Christchurch,  Hants.
Freemasons'  Tavern,  London.
Ship  &  Turtle  Tavern,  London.
Royal  Oak,  Dover.
Scarborough,  Yorkshire.
Freemasons'  Tavern,  London.
Devonport.
Masonic  Hall,  Liverpool.
Cross  Street,  Manchester.
Bridge  House  Hotel,  London.
Ship  &  Turtle  Tavern,  London.
Dewsbury,  Yorkshire.
New  Inn,  Windsor.
Denton,  near  Manchester.
George  &  Blue  Boar,  London.
White  Hart  Tavern,  London.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
3d  Tuesday.
Last  Wednesday.
1st  Wednesday.
3d  Saturday.
2d  Friday.
1st  Tuesday.
4th  Wednesday.
3d  Thursday.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
3d  Tuesday.
1st  Tuesday.
2d  Saturday.
3d  Wednesday.
3d  Wednesday.
2d  Wednesday.
2d  Monday.
Mou.  on  or  b.  f.  in.
3d  Thursday.
2d  Tuesday.
4th  Friday.
4th  Saturday.
1st  Tuesday.
3d  Monday.
4th  Tuesday.
2d,  4th  &  5th  Weds.
1st  Monday.
2d  Monday.
3d  Wednesday.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Thursday.
2d  Monday.
3d  Tuesday.
Fri.  before  f.  m.
4th  Friday.
2d  Tuesday.
1st  Monday.
3d  Wednesday.
3d  Friday.
4th  Thursday.
3d  Thursday.
2d  Wednesday.
2d  Tuesday.
2d  Thursday.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tuesday  near  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  af.  f.  m.
2d  Tuesday.
1st  Tuesday.

--- Sayfa 499 ---
ENGLAND.
48t
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
258*  Perseverance,
259*  Hope  &  Unity,
261    Commerce,
263*  Harmonic,
264    Stability,
266*  Prudence,
267*  Harmony,
268*  St.  John's,
269    St.  Andrew's,
270*  Charity,
272*  St.  Luke's,
273*  Benevolence,
275  Ionic,
276  United  Strength,
280*  Fidelity,
281    St.  Andrew's,
286    Nine  Muses,
287*  Union,
288*  Indefatigable,
289    Pilgrim,
292*  St.  Hild's,
294    Merchants',
298*  St.  George's,
299*  Loyalty,
302*  Tarborough,
3Q4*  St.  George's,
306*  Mechanics',
307    Royal  Union,
309*  True  Love  &  Unity,
310*  Mariners',
311*  Minerva,
312*  Loyal,
313*  Harmonic,
315*  Tyrian,
316*  Trinity,
317*  Harmony,
318    Unions,
319*  Phoenix,
322*  Amphibious,
324*  Prince  of  Wales's,
327*  Unanimity  &  Sincerity,
328*  Salopian,
329  Bank  of  England,
330  Nelson  of  the  Nile,
332*  Royal  Yorkshire,
333*  Naphthali,
334*  Unity,
335*  Union,
336*  Fidelity,
St.  Stephen's,  Norwich.
White  Hart  Inn,  Romford.
Haslingden.
Adelphi  Hotel,  Liverpool.
Green  Dragon,  London.
Todmorden,  Lancashire.
Garston,  Lancashire.
Bolton,  Lancashire.
East  London  Tavern,  London.
King's  Arms  Hotel,  Plymouth.
Coach  &  Horses  Inn,  Ipswioh.
Red  Lion  Inn,  Manchester.
Ship  &  Turtle  Tavern,  London.
8d  Thursday.
4th  Thursday.
Thursday  af.  f.  m.
2d  Thursday.
1st  Tuesday.
Thursday  n.  f.  m.
3d  Monday.
3d  Wednesday.
2d  Monday.
3d  Tuesday.
2d  Wednesday.
Tuesday  after  f.  m.
1st  Thursday.
Old  Jerusalem  Tavern,  London.  2d  Tuesday.
Tiverton,'  Devonshire.
Freemasons'  Tavern,  London,
it  u  *«
Masonic  Hall,  York.
Assembly  Rooms,  Swansea.
Ship  &  Turtle  Tavern,  London.  2d  Wednesday.
1st  Monday.
1st  Thursday.
2d  Tuesday.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
2d  Tuesday.
South  Shields,  Durham.
Masonic  Temple,  Liverpool.
Town  Hall,  Doncaster.
Masonic  Hall,  Guernsey.
Freemasons'  Hall,  Jersey.
2d  Monday.
1st  Monday.
Last  Friday.
3d  Wednesday.
1st  Monday.
Northumberland  Fusileers,  5th  Reg.
Masonic  Hall,  Jersey.
Cheltenham.
Brixhara,  Devonshire.
Masonic  Temple,  Liverpool.
Hull,  Yorkshire.
Freemasons'  Hall,  Barnstable.
Saracen's  Head,  Dudley.
Royal  Hotel,  Derby.
Castle  Inn,  Coventry.
Richmond,"  Surrey.
Freemasons'  Tavern,  London.
110  High  Street,  Portsmouth.
Heckmondwike.
3d  Thursday.
2d,  4th  &  5th  Frids.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
1st  Thursday.
2d  &  4th  Weds.
1st  Wednesday.
1st  Tuesday.
4th  Tuesday.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
Tuesday  n.  f.  m.
1st  Monday.
4th  Wednesday.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thatched-houseTavern,London.4th  Tuesday.
Taunton,  Somersetshire.
Shrewsbury.
Blackfriars,  London.
Batley,  Yorkshire.
Keighley,  Yorkshire.
Bury,  Lancashire.
Macclesfield.
Ludworth,  Stockport.
Angel  Inns,  Blackburn.
Wed.  on  or  af.  f.  m.
2d  Monday.
2d  Thursday.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Monday.
Monday  near  f.  m.
3d  Thursday.
lBt  Saturday.
Fri.  on  or  af.  f.  m.

--- Sayfa 500 ---
488
world's  masonic  register.
No.
Lodge.
Time  op  Meeting.
337*  Faith  &  Friendship,
338*  Royal  Clarence,
339*  Harmony,
341*  Tranquillity,
342*  Harmony,
343*  Good  Fellowship,
344*  Friendship,
348*  St.  John's,
349*  Worcester,
350*  Fortitude,
351*  Bedford,
352*  Amity,
356*  Shakspeare,
357*  Love  and  Honor,
358*  Samaritan,
361*  Unanimity,
363*  Harmony,
364*  Fidelity,
365*  Huddersfield,
366*  School  of  Plato,
367*  Rural  Philanthropic,
368*  Sincerity,
370*  King's  Friends',
371*  Constitutional,
372*  Combermere  Union,
373*  Royal  Brunswick,
374*  Withan,
375*  Harmony,
376     Emulation,
377*  Minerva,
378*  Apollo,
379*  Hope,
380    Benevolent,
Philanthropic,
Apollo,
Alfred,
Prince  Frederick,
Prince  George,
Harmony,
Union,
South  Saxon,
Lion,
United  Friends,
Peace  and  Unity,
Royal  York,
Unity,  Peace  and  Concord,
Affability,
True  and  Faithful,
New  Forest,
382
383*
384*
385*
386*
387*
389
390*
391*
392
393
394
396*
399*
400
401
Berkley,  Gloucestershire.
Brighton,  Sussex.
Freemasons'  Hall,  Boston.
New  Church,  Lancashire.
Masonic  Hall,  Huddersfield.
Chelmsford.
Oldham,  Lancashire.
Bell  Hotel,  Leicester.
Bell  Hotel,  Worcester.
Lancaster.
Tavistock,  Devonshire.
Haslingden,  Lancashire.
Warwick.
Shepton  Mallet.
Baccup,  Lancashire.
Churchgate,  Stockport.
Todmorden,  Lancashire.
Freemasons'  Hall,  Leeds.
Huddersfield.
Cambridge.
Huntshill,  Somersetshire.
Liverpool.
Nantwich.
Beverly,  Yorkshire.
Macclesfield.
Sheffield.
Masonic  Hall,  Lincoln.
Rochdale.
Dartford,  Kent.
Ashton-under-Line.
Alcester,  Warwick.
Bradford,  Yorkshire.
Teignmouth.
15  Commercial  St.,  Leeds.
Beccles,  Suffolk.
West  Bar,  Leeds.
Hepden,  Yorkshire.
Stansfield,  Halifax.
Farehan.
Old  King's  Head,  Carlisle.
Freemasons'  Hall,  Lewes.
Whitby,  Yorkshire.
Yarmouth,  Norfolk.
Mitre  Inn,  Preston.
Old  Ship  Hotel,  Brighton.
1st  Royal  Regiment.
Pack  Horse  Inn,  Manchester.
Helston,  Cornwall.
Their  own  Hall,  Lymington.
1st  Monday.
3d  Friday.
2d  Wednesday.
Wed.  on  or  af.  f.  m.
Thursday  n.  f.  m.
Th.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Wednesday.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
2d  Wednesday.
1st  Monday.
2d  Tuesday.
Wednesday  n.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  af.  f.  m.
Wed.  near  f.  m.
4th  Thursday.
Wed.  near  f.  m.
Last  Wednesday.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
2d  Monday.
Monday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Thursday.
1st  Monday.
1st  Tuesday.
1st  Wednesday.
Last  Tuesday.
Thur.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  near  f.  m.
Monday  near  f.  m.
1st  Tuesday.
Last  Wednesday.
Tuesday  near  f.  m.
1st  Friday.
Monday  near  f.  m.
2d  Monday.
1st  Thursday.
Last  Tuesday.
3d  Wednesday.
3d  Monday.
2d  Monday.
4th  Tuesday.
1st  Tuesday.
1st  Thursday.
1st  Monday.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.

--- Sayfa 501 ---
ENGLAND.
489
No.
Time  of  Meeting.
402*  Loyalty,
403*  Unity,
404*  Peace,
405*  Concord,
406*  Moira,
407*  St.  John's,
408    Moira,
409*  Wigton  St.  John's,
411    St.  John's,
412*  Brotherly  Love,
413    One  and  All,
Mottram,  Cheshire.
Crewe,  Stockport.
VernoD  Arms  Inn,  Stockport.
Golden  Ball  Tavern,  Stockport.
Statley  Ridge,  Cheshire.
Pendleton,  Lancashire.
Freemasons'  Hall,  Bristol.
Lion  and  Lamb  Inn,  Cumber'd.
Torquay,  Devonshire.
Chough's  Inn,  Yeovil.
Private  room,  Bodmin.
415    Phoenix,  Honor  &Prud'ce,  Truro,  Cornwall.
417    Virtue  and  Silence,
418*  Royal  Preston,
420    Rectitude,
.421*  Benevolence,
422*  Candor,
423*  Vitruvian,
424*  Unanimity,
425*  Alfred,
426    Wellington,
428*  Royal  Sussex,
429    Concord,
430*  Faith,
432*  Perseverance,
434*  United  Brethren,
435    Noah's  Ark,
436*  St.  John's,
439*  Charity,
445  Orthes,
446  Royal  Sussex,
Hadleigh,  Suffolk.
Preston,  Lancashire.
Moncton'Farleigh,  Wiltshire.
Marple,  Cheshire.
Dobcross,  Yorkshire.
Ross,  Herefordshire.
Penrith,  Cumberland.
Masonic  Hall,  Oxford.
Rye,  Sussex.
Freemasons'  Hall,  Portsea.
Stanly  Arms  Inn,  Preston.
Radcliff  Bridge,  Lancashire.
Old  Bull  Inn,  Blackburn.
Clayton-le-Dale.
Navigation  Inn,  Tipton.
Bolton,  Lancashire.
Bolton-le-Moors,  Lancashire.
6th  Regiment  of  Foot.
Repton.  Derbyshire.
453*  Roy  alSussex  of  Emulation,  Swindon,  Wiltshire.
559*  Benevolence,
460    Apollo  University,
462    Peace  and  Harmony,
463*  Pomfret,
566*  Industry,
466    Doric,
469    Keystone,
472    Cambrian,
474    St.  David's,
478*  Probity  and  Freedom,
479    Samaritan,
481*  Lime  Rock,
486*  St.  George's,
508  Perseverance,
509  Harmony,
511    Socrates,
521    Lambton,
Private  rooms,  Sherborne.
Masonic  Hall,  Oxford.
Southampton.
Northampton.
Hyde,  Cheshire.
Private  room,  Grantham.
Whitworth,  Lancashire.
Neath,  Glamorganshire.
Milford,  Pembrokeshire.
Bull's  Head  Inn,  Rochdale.
Sandbach,  Cheshire.
Clithero,  Lancashire.
Qhertsey,  Surrey.
Crown  and  Anchor,  Mayport.
Budleigh,  Devonshire.
Huntingdon.
Chester-le-Street,  Durham.
Sat.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Tuesday.
Monday  af.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  af.  f.  m!
1st  Wednesday.
1st  Wednesday.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  af.  f.  m.
3d  Monday.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Wednesday.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1  st  Monday.
2d  Monday.
Tues.  on  or  n.  f.  m.
2d  Thursday.
3d  Wednesday.
3d  Thursday.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Thur.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Saturday  near  f.  m.
3d  Friday.
4th  Wednesday.
Fri.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Fri.  nearest  f.  m.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Last  Wednesday.
Wednesday  near  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
Thursday  near  f.  m.
1st  Friday.
Wednesday  af.  f.  m.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
Friday  b.  f.  m.
Thursday  n.  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wed.  next  f.  m.
2d  Tuesday.
2d  Wednesday.
Tuesday  n.  f.  m.
1st  Friday.

--- Sayfa 502 ---
490
world's  masonic  register.
No.       Lodge.
Location.
Tnre  op  Meetotg.
522*  Perfect  Friedship,
White  Horse  Hotel,  Ipswich.
3d  Wednesday.
523     Hope  and  Charity,
Masonic  Hall,  Kidderminster .     Last  Monday.
525    Loyal  Welsh,
Victoria  Hotel,  Pembroke  Dock.  Friday  b.  f.  m.
528*  Honor,
Milsom  Street,  Bath.
2d  Monday.
529     Integrity,
Moreley,  Yorkshire.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
534     Harmony  and  Industry,    Over-Darwen.
Saturday  n.  f.  m.
536*  Eoyal  Union,
King's  Arms,  Uxbridge.
Wednesday  n.  f.  m.
540*  St.  David's,
Castle  Hotel,  Bangor.
3d  Tuesday.
542     Unity,
Wareham,  Dorsetshire.
1st  Thursday.
543*  Airdale,
Baildon,  near  Leeds.
Wed.  on  or  n.  f.  m.
544     Prudence,
Halesworth,  Suffolk.
Monday  near  f.  m.
554*  St.  David's,
Salmon  Inn,  Berwick.
1st  Tuesday.
555    Southampton,
Southampton.
1st  Tuesday.
556    Guy's,
Leamington  Priors-
1st  Monday.
571     RoyaV  Albion,
First  Rifle  Brigade.
575    Royal  Forest,
Slaidburn,  Yorkshire.
Friday  near  f.  m.
676    Royal  Sussex,
Nottingham.
578     Hertford,
Shire  Hall,  Hertford.
Tuesday  nearest  f.m.
580*  Watford,
Freemasons'  Hall,  Watford.
Friday  near  f.  m.
582     Oxford  Light-Infantry,
52d  Regiment.
Tuesday  near  f.  m.
586    Northern  Counties,
Newcastle-upon-Tyne.
1st  Mon.  &  3d  Wed.
591     Three  Graces,
Haworth,  Yorkshire.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m,
592    Stortford,
Bishop's  Stortford.
Wednesday  n.  f.  m.
593*  Grove,
Ewell,  Surrey.
Saturday  b.  f.  m.
594    Commercial,
Nottingham.
2d  Monday.
595*  Holy  Temple,
Longtown,  Cumberland.
1st  Thursday.
597*  Union,
Masonic  Hall,  Reading.
Tuesday  n.  f.  m.
603     Surrey,
Swan  Inn,  Reigate.
2d  Friday.
605*  Faith  &  Unanimity,
Dorchester.
1st  Wednesday.
606     Menturia,
Upper  Hanley,  Staffordshire.
Tuesday  n.  f.  m.
607*  St.  Peter's,
Wolverhampton.
1st  Thursday.
610    Loyal  Djdustry,
Southmolton.
1st  Tuesday.
611*  Yarborough,
Gainsborough.
1st  Monday.
614*  Borough,
Grey  Horse  Inn,  Gateshead.
3d  Monday.
615     Cestrian,
Royal  Hotel,  Chester.
2d  Wednesday.
617     Shakspeare,
Spilsby.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
618    Wear,
Chester-le-Street,  Durham.
2d  &  4th  Tuesday.
620     Sincerity,
Northwich,  Cheshire.
1st  Wednesday.
621     Royal  Navy,
Royal  Hotel,  Ramsgate.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
623*  Fidelity,
White  Hart,  Manchester.
Tuesday  near  f.  m.
624*  St.  George's,
Masouio  Hall,  North  Shields.
1st  Monday.
625    Abbey,
Nuneaton.
Wednesday  af.  f.  m.
627     Hope,
Brightlingsea,  Es3ex.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
630     Salisbury,
71  Dean  St.,  London.
4th  Monday.
640    Science,
Bourton,  Dorsetshire.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
642     Scientific,
Bingley,  Yorkshire.
Mon.  on  or  af.  f.  m
645    Three  Grand  Principles, Lion  Hotel,  Cambridge.
1st  Thursday.
646    St.  Peter's,
Peterborough.
1st  Thursday.
650*  Union,
Starcross.
Saturday  n.  f.  m.

--- Sayfa 503 ---
ENGLAND.
491
NO.              LODdE.
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
652    Fidelity,
Talbot  Inn,  Towcester.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
653    Benevolent,
Wells,  Somersetshire.
1st  Thursday.
656    Loyal  Ancient,
Halifax,  Yorkshire.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
657    Cecil,
Sun  Inn,  Hitchin.
Thurs.  on  or  b  f.  m.
658    Marquis  of  Granby,
Eastwood,  Nottingham.
1st  &  3d  Saturday.
659    Cornubian,
Hayle,  Cornwall.
1st  Tuesday.
660*  Sutherland,
Town  Hall,  Burslem.
Wednesday  n.  f.  m.
661*  Frederick  of  Unity,
Swan,  Thames  Ditton.
4th  Friday.
663    Chigwell,
King's  Head  Inn,  Chigwell.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
666    Perseverance,
Freemasons'  Hall,  Kettering.
Tues.  on  or  a.  f.  m.
667    Union,
Barnard  Castle.
1st  Thursday.
669    West  Norfolk,
54th  Regiment.
670    Forester's,
Town  Hall,  Uttoxeter.
Friday  n.  f.  m.
671    Loyal  Monmouth,
Freemasons'  Hall,  Monmouth.
1st  Tuesday.
672    Aire  and  Calder,
Goole,  Yorkshire.
2d  Friday.
674*  Sutherland  Unity,
Newcastle-under:Lyme.
Friday  nearest  f.  m.
675    Fortitude,
Newton-Moor,  Cheshire.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
676    Bank  Terrace,
Accrington.
Friday  on  or  n.  f.  m.
680    East  Surrey  Concord.
Greyhound  Inn,  Croydon.
1st  Thursday.
683*  Cambrian,
Castle  Hotel,  Haverfordwest.
Friday  next  f.  m.
687    Merit,
Oundle,  Northamptonshire.
Last  Thursday.
688    Tudor,
Red  Lion  Inn,  Oldham.
Thursday  after  f.  m.
689    Light,
Dee's  Royal  Hotel,  Birmingham
i.  3d  Tuesday.
690    Hundred  of  Elloe,
Old  Turret,  Spalding.
2d  Thursday.
693*  Silurian,
Newport,  Monmouthshire.
1st  Wednesday.
694    Friendship  and  Sincerity,  Town  Hall,  Shaftsbury.
Thurs.  nearest  f.  m.
696    Faithful,
Masonic  Rooms,  Birmingham.
2d  Tuesday.
698    St.  John  the  Baptist,
Luton,  Bedfordshire.
Friday  near  f.  m.
699*  St.  Peter's,
Ivy  Brush  Hotel,  Carmarthen.
1st  Friday.
701*  Mersey,
Birkenhead,  Cheshire.
2d  Thursday.
702    Churchill,
Oxford.
706    St.  Peter's,
Newcastle-upon-Tyne.
2d  &  4th  Mondays.
707    St.  James,
Handsworth,  Staffordshire.
1st  Monday.
709    Sympathy,
Town  Hall,  Gravesend.
2d  Wednesday.
711     Faith,
Ashton-in-Makerfield.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
717*  Portsmouth,
136  High  St.,  Portsmouth.
2d  Thursday.
719    Benevolence,
Bideford,  Devonshire.
2d  Monday.
722    Boyal  Sussex,
Masonic  Hall,  Jersey.
2d  Thursday.
724    Royal  Lebanon,
Freemasons'  Hall,  Gloucester.
1st  Tuesday.
725*  Virtue  and  Honor,
George  Inn,  Axminster.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
726    North  Hants,
37th  Regiment.
3d  Monday.
727*  Wakefield,
Private  room,  Wakefield.
2d  Wednesday.
728    Peace  and  Harmony,
St.  Austell,  Cornwall.
Wed.  on  or  a.  f.  m.
729    Social  Friendship,
89th  Regiment.
3d  Thursday.
730*  Royal  Standard,
Dudley  Arms  Hotel,  Dudley.
2d  Tuesday.
739    Rectitude,
George  Hotel,  Rugby.
2d  Monday.
741*  Belvidere,
Star  Hotel,  Maidstone.
2d  Tuesday.
642    Berkhampstead,
Berkhampstead,  Hertford.
32
1st  Wednesday.

--- Sayfa 504 ---
492
world's  masonic  register.
Time  op  Meeting.
744     Mundy  Groye,
745*  United  Pilgrims,
749*  Tees,
750  St.  Martin's,
751  Prince  Edwin's,
752  Zetland,
757     Thoenix,
763     Truth,
765    Roden,
766*  John  of  Gaunt,
769     Honor,
771*  Integrity,
772     Semper  Fidelia,
774    St.  Helen's,
777    Eaton,
778*  Polish  National,
782     Zetland,
784     La  Tolerance,
786*  St.  Mathew,
787  Stuart,
788  Eoyal  Burnham,
793     De  Loraine,
795*  Cleveland,
803     Etruscan,
805  Wellington,
806  Castle  Martin,
809    Tarborough,
812*  Tarborough,
813     Fidelity,
815  Loyal  Victoria,
816  Temple,
817*  North  Essex,
818  Samarez,
819  Vernon,
820  Zetland,
824    Stability,
827  St.  Germain,
828  Unity,
829*  Hammond,
830     Fitzroy,
838    Perseverance,
g39    Loyal  Berkshire,
840    Forest,
845*  Harmony,
847*  Faith,
856    Elias  De  Derham,
857*  Howe,
858     St.  Botolph's,
Shipley,  Derbyshire.
Eennington,  London.
Stockton,  Durham.
Liskeard,  Cornwall.
Eye,  Suffolk.
King's  Arms  Hotel,  London.
Fox  Inn,  Stowmarket.
Freemasons'  Hall,  Huddersfield
Wem,  Salop.
Three  Crowns  Hotel,  Leicester.
Wolverhampton.
14th  Regiment  of  Foot.
Crown  Hotel,  Worcester.
Hartlepool,  Durham.
Congleton,  Cheshire.
Freemasons'  Tavern,  London,
Park  Hotel,  Birkenhead.
Freemasons'  Tavern,  London.
St.  Mathew's  Hall,  Walsall.
George  Hotel,  Bedford.
Star  Inn,  Burnham.
Newcastle-upon-Tyne.
Stokesley,  Yorkshire.
Longton,  Staffordshire.
Lord  Duncan  Tavern,  Deptford.
Lion  Hotel,  Pembroke.
Ventnor,  Isle  of  Wight.
George  Tavern,  London.
Southwold,  Suffolk.
Callington,  Cornwall.
Clarendon  Hotel,  Folkestone.
Bocking.
St.  Helier's,  Jersey.
Old  Town  Hall,  Dudley.
Cock  Hotel,  Guisborough.
Talbot  Hotel,  Stourbridge.
Selby.
Bull's  Head  Inn,  Warwick.
Masonic  Hall,  Guernsey.
London.
Swan  Inn,  Dudley.
Three  Tuns  Hotel,  Newbury.
Town  Hall,  Mansfield.
Wheat  Sheaf  Inn,  Ormskirk.
Openshaw,  Lancashire.
Freemasons'  Hall,  Salisbury.
Masonic  Rooms,  Birmingham.
Bristol  Hotel,  Lincolnshire.
2d  Tuesday.
4th  Wednesday.
1st  Thursday.
2d  Tuesday.
Thursday  near  f.  m.
2d  Wednesday.
3d  Friday.
!.  1st  Friday.
1st  Monday.
3d  Thursday.
2d  Friday.
2d  Thursday.
1st  Monday.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays.
Wednesday  n.  f.  m.
2d  Thursday.
3d  Wednesday.
1st  Tuesday.
1st  Tuesday.
Last  Wednesday.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m
1st  &  3d  Fridays.
1st  Monday.
2d  Thursday.
.  2d  Tuesday.
2d  Wednesday.
Tuesday  n.  f.  m.
1st  Thursday.
1st  Friday  n.  f.  m.
Last  Monday.
Monday  n.  f.  m.
Monday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Tuesday.
3d  Wednesday.
2d  Friday.
4th  Tuesday.
1st  Friday.
3d  Tuesday.
1st  Wednesday.
4th  Friday.
Last  Wednesday.
1st  Friday.
2d  Tuesday.
1st  Wednesday.
3d  Wednesday.
2d  Monday.
1st  Thursday.

--- Sayfa 505 ---
ENGLAND.
493
No.
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
859
Druids  Love  &  Liberality .Redruth,  Cornwall.
4th  Monday.
860
La  Cesaree,
Masonic  Hall,  Jersey.
Last  Thursday.
861
Buckingham,
Royal  White  Hart,  Aylesbury. Last  Monday.
862
Cotteswold,
Ram  Hotel,  Cirencester.
3d  Wednesday.
863
St.  Ann's,
Alderney.
2d  Wednesday.
864
Downshire,
Freemasons'  Arms,  Liverpool. 4th  Thursday.
869
Hibernia,
Hibernia  Hotel,  Holyhead.
1st  Monday.
873
Cherwell,
Red  Lion  Hotel,  Danbury.
4th  Monday.
874
Harmony,
Bradford,  Yorkshire.
3d  Thursday.
875*  St.  John's,
Wellington,  Shropshire.
1st  Friday.
876
North  York,
Station  Hotel,  Yorkshire.
Last  Friday.
877
Zetland,
Cleckheaton,  Yorkshire.
Fri.  on  or  a.  f.  m.
878
Mariners',
White  Hart  Hotel,  Littleha'pton
.  2d  Wednesday.
880
Combermere,
Seacombe,  Cheshire.
3d  Thursday.
881
Segontium,
Sportman  Hotel,  Caernarvon.
Tuesday,  a.  f.  m.
883
Chicheley,
Thrapston,  Northamptonshire. Monday  n.  f.  m.
886
Colston,
Freemasons'  Hall,  Bristol.
3d  Wednesday.
887
Marches,
Golden  Lion  Hotel,  Ludlow.
Monday  n.  f.  m.
889 Unity,
Southport,  Lancashire.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
898
St.  John's  and  St.  Paul'i i,  Erith,  Kent.
899
London  &  N.  W.  Fidelity ',  Crewe,  Cheshire.
902
Beadon,
Kew  Bridge,  Ealing.
3d  Wednesday.
905
St.  Cuthberga,
Wimborne,  Dorsetshire.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
907
Abbey,
Burton-upon-Trent.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
908
Devonshire,
Glossop,  Devonshire.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
909
Lansdown  Unity,
Calne,  Wiltshire.
2d  Tuesday.
910
South  Suffolk,
Sudbury,  Suffolk.
Tues.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
913
St.  Cuthbert's,
Howden,  Yorkshire.
2d  Thursday.
914 Methuen,
Queen's  R.  Hotel,  N.  Swindon
.  1st  Tuesday.
915
Concord,
Trowbridge.
Tuesday  n.  f.  m.
916 Tarborough,
Royal  Hotel,  Manchester.
2d  Monday.
919
De  Ogle,
Queen's  Head  Inn,  Morpeth.
2d  Tuesday.
920*  Portland,
Stoke-upon-Trent.
1st  Thursday.
926
Royal,
Filey,  Yorkshire.
2d  Monday.
928
Cheetham  and  Crumpsall,  Crumpsall,  Manchester.
1st  Thursday.
935
Star  in  the  East,
Private  rooms,  Harwich.
2d  Tuesday.
936
Brecknock,
Swan  Hotel,  Brecon.
Last  Saturday.
937
Holme  Valley,
Holmfirth,  Yorkshire.
Friday  n.  f.  m.
940
Peveril  of  the  Peak,
New  Mills,  Stockport.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
955
Canonbury,
Canonbury  Tavern,  London.
2d  Thursday.
957
Blagdon,
Blyth,  Northumberland.
2d  Wednesday.
958
Camalodunum,        *
New  Malton,  Yorkshire.
1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
959
Fawcett,
Seaham  Harbour.
Wed.  near  f.  m.
960
Dartmouth,
West  Bromwich,  Stafford.
2d  Friday.
961
Wiltshire  Fidelity,
Town  Hall,  Devizes.
2d  Thursday.
963
Montagu,
Lyme  Regis,  Dorsetshire.
2d  Monday.
964
Benevolence,
Dartmoor,  Devonshire.
1st  Saturday.
965
Alliance,
Roby,  Lancashire.
1st  Tuesday.
971
St.  John's,
Caledonian  Hotel,  Liverpool.
1st  Wednesday.

--- Sayfa 506 ---
494
world's  masonic  register.
No.
Lodge.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
976
Earl  Ellesmere,
Farnworth,  Lancashire.
2d  Wednesday.
979
St.  David's,
Aberdare,  Glamorgan.
3d  Wednesday.
980
Sefton,
Waterloo,  near  Liverpool.
3d  Tuesday.
981
Scarsdale,
Chesterfield,  Derby.
1st  Thursday.
983
Isca,
Newport,  Monmouthshire.
1st  Thursday.
985
Northumberland,
Newcastle-upon-Tyne.
1st  Tuesday.
986
Jerusalem,
Freemasons'  Hall,  Bristol.
2d  Tuesday.
995
Oakley,
Black  Boy,  Basingstoke.
1st  Monday.
996
St.  Teilo,
Llandilo,  Carmarthenshire.
1st  Monday.
997
St.  Bartholomew,
Wednesbury,  Staffordshire.
3d  Wednesday.
998
United,
George  Hotel,  Colchester.
2d  Wednesday.
999
Ryde,
Ryde,  Isle  of  Wight.
Last  Wednesday.
1000
Boscawen,
Chacewater,  Cornwall.
4th  Monday.
1002
Nelson,
Bed  Lion,  Woolwich.
3d  Wednesday.
1004
Sherborne,
Stroud,  Gloucestershire.
2d  Wednesday.
1005
Clifton,
Black  Pool,  Lancashire.
3d  Saturday.
1006
Camden,
Kentishtown,  London.
3d  Tuesday.
1008
Florence  Nightingale,
Freemasons'  Tavern,  London.
1st  Wednesday.
1009
St.  Mary's,
Bull  Inn,  Bridport.
Last  Thursday.
1010
Carnarvon,
Mitre  Inn,  Hampton  Court.
2d  Wednesday.
1011
Invicta  Ashford,
George  Hotel,  Ashford.
1st  Wednesday.
1012
Pleiades,
Private  room,  Totness.
Thurs.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1014
Lindsey,
Upgate,  Louth.
Friday  after  f.  m.
1017
Panmure,
Lower  Clapton,  Hackney.
3d  Saturday.
1022
Panmure,
Swan  Tavern,  London.
3d  Monday.
1023
Independence,
Pied  Bull,  Chester.
Last  Tuesday.
1025
Panmure,
Aldershott,  Hants,
1st  Tuesday.
1026
Derby,
Bootle,  Lancashire.
4th  Wednesday.
1027
Stoneleigh,
King's  Arms  Hotel,  Kenilworth .  1st  Wednesday.
1028
Staffordshire  Knot,
Grand  Junction  Hotel,  Stafford .  2d  Tuesday.
1032
Ellesmere,
Chorley,  Lancashire.
Last  Wednesday.
1033
Arboretum,
Arboretum  Hotel,  Derby.
2d  Wednesday.
1034*  Boyal  Brunswick,
Old  Ship  Hotel,  Brighton.
2d  Thursday.
1035
Westbourne,
Paddington,  London.
3d  Thursday.
1036
Londesborough,
Bridlington.
1st  Tuesday.
1039
Wentworth,
Wellingborough.
2d  Mon.  after  f.  m.
1041
Temperance,
Masonic  Booms,  Birmingham.
1st  Thursday.
1044
Crystal  Palace,
Sydenham,  London.
1st  Thursday.
1045
Meridian,
H.  M.'s  31st  Regiment  of  Foot ,  2d  Friday.
1051
Belgrave,
Pimlico,  London.
2d  Wednesday.
1052
Friendship,
Cleekheaton,  Yorkshire.
Monday  nearest  f  m.
1053
Estnor,
Ledbury,  Herefordshire.
2d  Monday.
1055
Prince  Frederick  William,  St.  John's  Wood,  London.
4th  Wednesday.
1056
High  Cross,
Tottenham,  London.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
1057
St,  Tudno,
Llandudno,  North  Wales.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  in.
1060
Ellesmere,
Runcorn,  Cheshire.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1063
St.  John's,
Old  Bell  Hotel,  Dursley.
1st  Tuesday.
1066
Harbour  of  Refuge,
West.  Hartlepool.
2d  Tuesday,
1067
St.  James's,
Bermondsey,  London.
1st  Tuesday.

--- Sayfa 507 ---
ENGLAND.
495
No.       Lodge.  Location.                                  Time  of  Meeting.
1068     Preston,  Putney,  London.
1073  Castle,  Castle  Hotel,  Windsor.
1074  Pilgrim's,  George  Inn,  Glastonbury.
1079  Royal  Alfred,  Angel  Inn,  Guilford.
1080  Bard  of  Avon,  Stratford-upon-Avon.
1081*  Ferrers  and  Ivanhoe,  Ashby  de  le  Zouch.
1082  Royal  Alfred,  Ealing,  London.
1083  Merchant  Navy,  Poplar,  London;
1086  Wellington,  Walmer  Castle,  Deal.
1087  Twelve  Brothers,  Royal  Hotel,  Southampton.
1088  Croxteth,  West  Derby,  Lancashire.
1089  Beaureper,  Bclper,  Derbyshire.
1090  Crescent,  Twickenham,  London.
1091  Dunheved,  Lauuceston,  Cornwall.
1094    Pelham  Pillar,  Chapman's  Hotel,  Grimsby.
1096  Warden,  Sutton,  Coldfield.
1097  St   John's,  Maidenhead.
1099     Hauley,  Dartmouth,  Devonshire.
1104  Repose,  King's  Head  Hotel,  Derby.
1105  St.  Andrew's,  Swan  Inn,  Biggleswade.
1106  Carnarvon,  Black  Dog,  Havant.
1109    Cabbell,  Star  Inn,  Norwich.
1111  United  Good  Fellowship,  Rose  and  Crown,  Wisbeach.
1112  Craven,  Private  room,  Shipton.
1113  Yarborough,  Old  Ship,  Brighton.
1114  Eden  Valley,  King's  Head,  Appleby.
1115  New  Concord,  Rosemary  Branch,  Hoxton.
1116  Parritt  and  Axe,  George  Hotel,  Crewkerne.
1117  Blair,  Hulme,  near  Manchester.
1118  Royds,  Spring  Gardens,  Wandle.
1120    Philanthropic,          .  Angel,  Abergavenny.
1122     Lily  of  Richmond,  London,                                           2d  Thursday.
1124    Victoria  Rifles,  London.                                           1st  Wednesday.
1129    St.  John's,  Dewsbury,  Yorkshire.                 Last  Monday.
1131
  Kent.
1133    British  Oak,  •     London.                                        4th  Monday.
1135
  Wales,  (S.  E.  D.)
1136  Ranelagh,  London.                                        2d  Tuesday.
1139
 Yorkshire.
1140
  Lincolnshire.
1141
  Gloucestershire.
1142  Scientific,  Stony  Stratford,  Buckinghamshire.  1st  Saturday.
1st  Monday.
Wed.  near  f.  m.
Tues.  near  f.  m.
2d  Monday.
1st  Monday.
Monday  after  f.  m.
4th  Friday.
2d  Thursday.
2d  &  4th  Thursdays.
Last  Saturday.
4th  Monday.
4th  Thursday.
2d  Saturday.
Thurs.  on  or  af.  f.  m.
1st  Thursday.
1st  Tuesday.
2d  Monday.
2d  Monday.
3d  Thursday.
February  6,  1787,  His  Eoyal  Highness  the  Prince  of  AVales  was  made  a
Mason.
November  21, 1787,  the  Duke  of  York  was  made  a  Mason.

--- Sayfa 508 ---
496  world's  masonic  register.
SUBSCKIBEKS'  NAMES.
LIVEKPOOL.
Ball,  W.  B.,  Chief  Cook,  Steamship  Persia,  5  Anderson  St.,  Great  Bloomer.
Merchant,  294.
Ferguson,  James,  Second  Officer  Steamship  Africa,  36  Augustus  St.    Hiram,
17,  New  Jersey,  U.  S.
Forsyth,  Wm.,  Second  Officer  Steamship  Persia,  39  Stirling  St.,  Kirkdale.
Derby,  1026.
Martin,  P.,  Shipping  Merchant.    Downshire,  864;  Woolton  chap.,  245.
Morfel,  Peter  J.,  Joiner  Steamship  Persia,  1  Pritten  St.  Mount  Pleasant,
Liverpool;  Enterprise,  48,  Jersey  City.
LONDON.
Clarke,  Hyde.  D.  C.  L.,  C.  E.  B.  B.  "Works,  Smyrna,  Turkey;  S.  G.  T.  G.
33d,  Belgium;  S.  P.  B.  S.  Sup.  G.  Council  of  England,  France,  and  Grand
Orient  of  France;  K.  H,  England  and  France;  S.  P.  B.  X.,  Metropolitan  B.  X.
Chapter,  London,  La  Trinite,  France,  and  La  Gloire,  Smyrna,  Asia;  M.  P.  Sov.
Ch.,  La  Gloire,  Smyrna;  P.  P.  B.  A.;  W.  M.,  Homer  Lodge,  1108,  Smyrna,
under  Grand  Lodge  of  England;  P.  M.,  La  Gloire  and  Tolerance;  member  of
Lodges  32,  91,  and  1108;  hon.  member  of  Lodges  La  Trinite,  Trinite  et  Unite,
Tolerance,  Gloire,  de  Sup.  Orient  of  France,  Belgium,  Switzerland,  etc. ;  Prov.
G.  M.  and  K.  T.
The  temple  on  Mount  Moriah  was  begun  in  the  fourth  year  of  the  reign  of
King  Solomon,  which  was  a.m.  2992.
In  the  year  a.m.  3029,  Solomon  died,  and  Behoboam  was  crowned  King  of
Israel.  The  tribes  of  Israel,  however,  were  divided,  because  of  the  refusal  of
Behoboam  to  redress  some  grievances,  and  ten  of  the  tribes  united  under  the
banner  of  Jeroboam,  and  elected  him  their  King,  under  the  title  of  King  of  Israel.
The  tribes  of  Judah  and  Benjamin,  however,  remained  loyal  to  Behoboam,  and
he  was  thenceforward  called  King  of  Judah.
The  tribes  were  thus  divided,  and  remained  under  two  distinct  governments,
two  hundred  and  fifty-four  years,  when  the  ten  tribes  fell  a  prey  to  Salmanezer,
King  of  Assyria,  who  utterly  destroyed  their  government.  The  subsequent
history  of  the  ten  tribes  of  Israel  is  involved  in  mystery.  The  two  tribes,  under
the  Kings  of  Judah,  dwelt  in  the  cities  of  Judah  and  Benjamin.
In  a.m.  3033,  the  fifth  year  of  the  reign  of  Behoboam,  Shishak,  King  of  Egypt,
pillaged  the  temple  at  Jerusalem,  and  carried  off  the  holy  vessels.
In  a.m.  3063,  Asa  brought  into  the  temple  the  golden  vessels  which  he  and
his  father  had  prepared  and  dedicated.
In  a.m.  3380,  Josiah  orders  the  temple  to  be  repaired,  and  finds  a  copy  of  the
book  of  the  law.

--- Sayfa 509 ---
IRELAND.
Lodges  with  an  *  prefixed  have  Chapters  attached;  those  with  a  -j-  have  Chapters  and
Encampments.
No.  Lodge.  Location.  Time  of  Meeting.
Grand  Masters',   Freemasons'  Hall,  Dublin   Second  Friday.
If
 Cork.
2*
 Freemason's  Hall,  Dublin   First  Monday.
3*
 dork.
4f
 Freemasons'  Hall,  Dublin   Fourth  Tuesday.
5f
 Waterford.
6*
 Freemasons'  Hall,  Dublin   Third  Saturday.
7
 7th  Dragoon  Guards.
8*
 Cork.
9
 Dungannon.
lOf
 Belfast,  Antrim  co.
12f
 Freemasons'  Hall,  Dublin   Third  Thursday.
13f
 Limerick.
14
 Galway.
15*
 Skibbereen,  Cork  co.
16
 Ramoan,  Antrim  co.
17
 Vowferry,  Antrim  co.
18
 Newry,  Down  co.
19
 Ballycastle,  Antrim  co.
20f
 Sligo.
21
 Castlebar,  Mayo  co.
22f
 Belfast,  Antrim  co.
23*
 Newry,  Down  co.
24
 Drumlough,  Down  co.
25
 Freemasons'  Hall,  Dublin   Second  Monday.
26*
 26th  Foot.
27
 Castle  Townsend,  Cork  co.
28
 Antrim.
29*
 Donaghadee,  Down  co.
30   Killyleigh,  Down  co.
31
 Massareen,  Antrim  co.
32f
 Waterford.
35
 Saintfield,  Down  co.
36
 36th  Regiment.
37f
 Kilkenny.
38
 Ballintoy,  Antrim  co.
39
 Armagh.
(497)

--- Sayfa 510 ---
498  world's  masonic  keqisteii.
N„.  LcGE.  LOCATJO*.    TIME  OF  MBBT,SG.
404.   Belfast,  Antrim  co.
41
 Lame,  Antrim  co.
43
 Carrickfergus,  Antrim  co.
44*
 Clonmel,  Tipperary  co.
45
 Glenarm,  Antrim  co
45*
 Comber,  Down  co.
47
 Dundalk,  Louth  co.
4g*
 Bushmills,  Antrim  co.
49
 Charleville.  Cork  co.
50
 Freemasons'  Hall,  Dublin   Fourth  Thursday
51*
 Belfast,  Antrim  co.
52
 Londonderry.
54*
 Ballymacarrett,  Down  co.
55
 Tipperary.
56
 Oldstone,  Antrim  co.
57
 Ballymoney,  Antrim  co.
58
 Belfast,  Antrim  co.
59
 Belfast,  Antrim  co.
60
 Ennis,  Clare  co.
63*
 20th  Regiment.
64
 Cross,  Antrim  co.
65
 72d  Regiment.
66
 Tralee,  Kerry  co.
67f
 Cork.
68f
 Youghal,  Cork  co.
69
 Londonderry.
70
 Warringsford,  Down  co.
71
 Cork.
72
 Broughgammon,  Antrim  co.
73f
 Limerick.
74
 Hollywood,  Down  co.
75
 Skerry,  Antrim  co.
76
 Longford.
77
 Newry,  Down  co.
78
 .•
 Castleblaney,  Monaghan  co.
79
 Tanderagee,  Armagh  co.
80
 Loughbriokland,  Down  co.
81*
 Garvah,  Londonderry  co.
82
 Portadown,  Armagh  co.
83
 83d  Regiment.
84
 Bandon,  Cork  co.
85*
 Shercock,  Cavan  co.
86*
 Downpatrick,  Down  co.
87
 Billy,  Antrim  co.
88f
 Belfa'st,  Antrim  co.
89
 Ballycastle,  Antrim  co.
90*
 Cavan,  Cavan  co.
91
 4th  Regiment.
92
 Donegore,  Antrim  co.

--- Sayfa 511 ---
IRELAND.  499
No.  Lodge.  Location.  Time  of  Meetino.
93-f-
 Freemasons'  Hall,  Dublin   Third  Friday.
94
 Kilwaughter,  Antrim  co.
95*
 Cork,  Cork  co.
,96
 Armoy,  Antrim  co.
97*
 Belfast,  Antrim  co.
98
 Newtownbreda,  Down  co.
100f
 Freemasons'  Hall,  Dublin   Second  Monday.
lOlf
 Athlone,  Westmeath  co.
102
 Lifford,  Donegal  co.
103
 Newtownbreda,  Down  co.
104
 Portaferry,  Down  co.
105
 Tanderagee,  Armagh  co.
106
 Larne,  Antrim  co.
107
 Ennistymon,  Clare  co.
108f
 Pomeroy,  Tyrone  co.
109
 Loughany,  Down  co.
110
 Kilrea,  Londonderry  co.
Ill*
 Belfast,  Antrim  co.
112
 Lisburn,  Antrim  co.
113*
 Killyleigh,  Down  co.
114
 Pilltown,  Kilkenny  co.
116*
 Carlow,  Carlow  co.
117
 Killinchy,  Down  co.
118
 Belfast,  Antrim  co.
119
 Banbridge,  Down  co.
121
 Ballymullen,  Antrim  co.
122
 Dungannon,  Tyrone  co.
124
 Ballydown,  Down  co.
125*
 Freemasons'  Hall,  Dublin   Fourth  Wednesday.
127
 Coleraine.
128*
 39th  Regiment.
129
 Belleek.
130
 64th  Regiment.
131*
 Mullingar,  Westmeath  co.
132
 Freemasons'  Hall,  Dublin   First  Wednesday.
133
 Comber,  Down  co.
134*
 Lurgan,  Armagh  co.
135
 Glenavy.
136
 Ballygowan,  Down  co.
137f
 Ballinasloe,  Galway  co.
138
 82d  Regiment.
139*
 Mount  Mellick,  Queen's  co.
140
 Crumlin,  Antrim  co.
141+
 Freemasons'  Hall,  Dublin   Third  Tuesday.
142
 Castle  Wellan.
143*
 Freemasons'  Hall,  Dublin   Second  Wednesday.
144
 Kilkeel,  Down  co.
145
 Carrickmacross,  Monaghan  co.
146
 Lisbelnagroagh,  Antrim  co.

--- Sayfa 512 ---
500  world's  masonic  register.
No.  Lodge.  Location.  Time  op  Meeting.
147
 Kilrea,  Londonderry  co.
148
 Cogry,  Antrim  co.
149
 Portarlington.
150*
 Rathdowney,  Queen's  co.
152
 Chatham  Hall,  Antrim  co.
153f
 Freemasons'  Hall,  Dublin   Last  Monday.
154f
 Belfast,  Antrim  oo.
155
 Hilltown,  Down  co.
156
 Bandon,  Cork  co.
158
 Ballinrobe,  Mayo  co.
160
 Craigarogan,  Antrim  co.
161
 Wicklow,  Wicklow  co.
162
 Islandmagee,  Antrim  co.
163*
 Parsonstown,  King's  co.
164
 Londonderry.
165
 Comber,  Down  co.
167f
 Athy,  Kildare  co.
168
 Ballywatermoy,  Antrim  co.
169
 Moneymore,  Londonderry  co.
1"0*
 Crawfurdsburn,  Down  co.
171*
 Freemasons'  Hall,  Dublin   First  Tuesday.
172
 Killough.
1'°
 Grey  Abbey,  Down  co.
!'*
 Stewartstown,  Tyrone.
1'°
 Raloo,  Antrim  co.
I76*
 88th  Regiment.
1"
 Ballynure,  Antrim  co.
1'°
 Lisburn,  Antrim  co.
1°2
 Magheramorne,  Antrim  co.
I83*
 Grey  Abbey,  Down  co.
l^t    Drum,  Monaghan  co.
1°6
 Knockbracken,  Antrim  co.
1°"*
 Drumkeerin,  Leitrim  co.
1°"
 Connor,  Antrim  co.
190
 Queenstown,  Cork  co.
191
 Hillsborough,  Down  co.
192
 Ballybay,  Monaghan  co.
193
 Carrowdore,  Down  co.
194
 Bucknaw,  Antrim  co.
195
 Ballyvesey,  Antrim  co.
196
 Carndonagh,  Donegal  co.
19'
 Dundrum,  Down  co.
19°    Newtownards,  Down  co.
I"    Five-mile-town,  Tyrone  co.
~°°   Clonmel,  Tipperary  co.
"01*
 Nenagh,  Tipperary  co.
202*
 Newcastle,  Limerick  co.
203    Magherally,  Down  co.
205t
 Naas,  Kildare  co.

--- Sayfa 513 ---
IRELAND.  501
No.  Lodge.  Location.  Time  of  Meeting.
207    Ovoca,  Wicklow  co.
210    Caledon,  Tyrone  co.
213*
 Millvale,  Armagh  co.
215    Newbridge.
216    Carnlow,  Antrim  co.
217    Ballina,  Mayo  co.
218    48th  Regiment.
219    Portadown.
228
 Gorey.
229
 Dervock,  Antrim  co.
233
 Ballymote,  Sligo  co.
242-j-
  Boyle,  Roscommon  co.
243
 Garvagh,  Derry  co.
245f
 Freemasons'  Hall,  Dublin   Second  Tuesday.
246
 Broughshane,  Antrim  co.
247
 Madderow,  Down  co.
248
 Roscommon.
254
 Hollywood,  Down  co.
255
 Ballyeaston,  Antrim  co.
256*
 Cumberclady,  Londonderry  co.
257    Ballynure,  Antrim  co.
272    Belfast,  Antrim  co.
276    Straid,  Antrim  co.
280    Moyarget,  Antrim  co.
284    40th  Regiment.
287    Ballyshannon,  Donegal  co.
289    Randalstown,  Antrim  co.
300    Belturbet,  Cavan  co.
305    Rathkeale.
306   Banagher,  King's  co.
308    Ballymahon,  Longford  co.
309    Newtownbreda,  Down  co.
310    Killeshandra,  Cavan  co.
311    Templemore,  Tipperary  co.
314    Mealough,  Antrim  co.
317
 Ballyclare,  Antrim  co.
321*
 Tullamore,  King's  co.
322
 27th  Regiment.
332*
 Omagh,  Tyrone  co.
333f
 Limerick.
334*
 Gillygooly,  Tyrone  co.
335*
 Broomhedge,  Armagh  co.
336
 Banbridge,  Down  co.
337
 Bushmills,  Antrim  co.
340
 Strokestown,  Roscommon  co.
351*
 Monaghan,  Monaghan  co.
352*
 Castleblaney.
354
 49th  Regiment.
355*
 Tamlaght,  Londonderry  co.

--- Sayfa 514 ---
502  world's  masonic  register.
No.  Lodge.  Location.  Time  of  Meeting.
356*    Maze,  Down  co.
364    Ballymena,  Antrim  co.
367    Downpatrick,  Down  co.
372    Gillhall,  Down  co.
373    Killarney,  Kerry  co.
374    Carareagh,  Antrim  co.
375    Aughnadarragh,  Down  co.
379*
 Tralee,  Kerry  co.
384f
 Dundalk,  Louth  co.
385
 Cloghnakilty,  Cork  co.
388
 67th  Regiment.
394
 Craigmore,  Armagh  co.
395
 Charlemont,  Tyrone  co.
398*    ;
 Maryborough,  Queen's  co.
399
 Adverness.
401   Monaghan,  Monaghan  co.
4"2
 Abbeyleix,  Queen's  co.
405
 Ballyconnell,  Cavan  co.
407*
 Ramelton,  Donegal  co.
4°9
 •   Armagh,  Armagh  co.
411*
 Drogheda,  Louth  co.
414*
 Bushmills,  Antrim  co.
430
 Ballyclare,  Antrim  co.
'
 Ballymena,  Antrim  co.
441
 38th  Regiment.
'
 Newtnwnards,  Down  co.
4^°
 Drogheda,  Louth  co.
4^3
 Callowhill,  Cavan  co.
'°
 Cookstown,  Tyrone  co.
i7_3
 Enniskillen.
'"
 Stewartstown.
  Freemasons'  Hall,  Dublin   3d  Monday.
f°"
 Freemasons'  Hall,  Dublin   4th  Thursday.
510
 28th  Regiment.
3
 Ligoniel,  Antrim  co.
  Moneymore,  Londonderry  co.
*
 Curran,  Londonderry  co.
'
 Culleybackey,  Antrim  co.
544
 Ballykeel,  Down  co.
'*
 Newtownstewart,  Tyrone  co.
5rf
 Fermoy,  Cork  co.
  Moneyrea,  Down  co.
560
 ;
 Belturbet,  Cavan  co.
  Coronary,  Cavan  co.
  Lambeg,  Antrim  co.
5J°
 5th  Dragoon  Guards.
  Killygore,  Antrim  co.
  6th  Dragoon  Guards.
588t    v   Donegal,  Donegal  co.

--- Sayfa 515 ---
IRELAND.  SO.'J
No.  Lodge.  Location.  Time  of  Meetim.
589*   Island  of  Inch,  Londonderry  co.
591
 Donegal,  Donegal  co.
602
 Derriaghy,  Antrim  co.
606*
 Cargycreevy,  Antrim  co.
607
 13th  Dragoons.
609*
 ...Belfast,  Antrim  co.
61S
 Magherafelt,  Londonderry  co.
615
 Lame,  Antrim  co.
620*
 Salthill,  Dublin  co   2d  Wednesday.
623f
 Armagh,  Armagh  co.
624
 Killinchy,  Down,  co.
628
 Cootehill,  Cavan  co.
633
 Londonderry.
640*
 Londonderry.
642f
 Kilkenny.
645
 Carnmoney,  Antrim  co.
646  ..:
 Durrow,  Queen's  co.
652*
 Lambeg,  Antrim  co.
655
 Ballymoney,  Antrim  co.
659*
 Lisnod,  Antrim  co.
660f
 Mountmellick,  Queen's  co.
669
 Dungiven,  Antrim  co.
672
 Glenally,  Tyrone  co.
675-J-
 Donaghadee,  Down  co.
676
 Ballymena,  Antrim  co.
682
 Lisburn,  Antrim  co.
683
 Ballykeel,  Down  co.
696
 Mullyglass,  Down  co.
697f
 Warrenpoint,  Down  co.
704*
 Ahoghill,  Down  co.
705
 Casklederg,  Tyrone  co.
719
 Newtownlimavady,  Derry.
728    Freemasons'  Hall,  Dublin   3d  Saturday.
732    Dromore,  Down  co.
744    Carrigallen,  Leitrim  co.
746    Bangor,  Down  co.
753    Rooskey,  Cavan  co.
754    Coleraine,  Derry  co.
775    Ballymena,  Antrim  co.
783    Dunmurry,  Antrim  co.
788    Carncastle,  Antrim  co.
789*
 Eglish,  Armagh  co.
790
 Newbliss,  Monaghan  co.
794f
 Newbliss,  Monaghan  co.
795
 Ashfield,  Cavan  co.
796       '
 Bailieboro',  Cavan  co.
798
 Sion  Bridge,  Tyrone  co.
799
 .'   Castlederg,  Tyrone  co.
804
 Cleffany,  Fermanagh  co.

--- Sayfa 516 ---
504  world's  masonic  register.
No.  Lodge.  Location.  Time  of  Meeting.
811*    Denight,  Antrim  co.
819
 Ederney,  Fermanagh  co.
854*    Carrick-on-Shannon,  Leitrim  co.
860
 Ballyrobin,  Antrim  co.
877+   Arklow,  Wicklow  co.
881*    Clones,  Monaghan  co.
891*    Enniskillen,  Fermanagh  CO.
895
 71st  Regiment.
909
 Killifaddy,  Tyrone  co.
919
 Drumsbambo,  Leitrim  co.
935*    Wexford,  Wexford  co.
941
 Aiticlave,  Londonderry  co.
957
 Redhills,  Cavan  co.
978
 Ballylesson,  Down  co.
996
 Mohill,  Leitrim  co.
1000
 Conlig,  Down  co.
1008
 Portrush,  Antrim  co.
1009
 Clough,  Down  co.
1012   Carrickfergus,  Antrim  co.
1014
 Ballycarry,  Antrim  co.
ISLE   OF    MAN.
No.  Location.  Time  of  Meeting.
123    Douglass.  Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
212    Castletown.  Monday  af.  f.  m.
221    Peel.
ISLE   OF   JERSEY.
No.  Location.  Time  of  Melting.
34*
 St.  Heliers.  3d  Monday.
In  1790,  His  Eoyal  Highness  Prince  Edward,  afterward  Duke  of  Kent,  was
initiated  in  Union  Lodge,  Geneva ;  and  his  brother,  Prince  Augustus  Frederick,
was  made  a  Mason  at  Berlin.

--- Sayfa 517 ---
SCOTLAND.
No.
LOOATION.
Lodge.
Looation.
Ancient  or  Mother,  Kilwinning.
1  Mary's  Chapel,     Edinburgh.
2  Canongate  Kil-
winning, Canongate.
3  Scoon  and  Perth,  Scoon  and  Perth.
4  Glasgow  Kilwin-
ning, Glasgow.
6  Canongate     and
Leith,  Leith  and  Canongate.
6  Old     Kilwinning
St.  John,         Inverness.
7  Hamilton  Kilwin-
ning, Hamilton.
8  Journeymen,         Edinburgh.
9  St.  John's,  Dumblane.
10  Dalkeith  Kilwin-
ning, Dalkeith.
11  St.  John's,  Maybole.
12  Greenock  Kilwin-
ning, Greenock.
13  Torphichen   Kil-
winning, Bathgate.
14  St.  John,  Dunkeld.
15  Montrose  Kilwin-
ning, .  Montrose.
17  Ancient  Brazen,  Linlithgow.
18  St.  John's  Kilwin-
ning, Dumbarton.
19  St.  John,  Cupar-of-Fife.
20  St.  John,  Lesmahagow.
21  Old  St.  John,        Lanark.
22  St.  John's  Kilmar-
nock, Kilmarnock.
23  Dunse,  Dunse.
24  Peebles   Kilwin-
ning, Peebles.
25  St.  Andrew,  St.  Andrews.
26  St.JohnDunferm-
line,  Dunfermline.
27  St.  Mungo,  Glasgow.
28  St.  John's  Kilwin-
ning, Kirkintilloch.
80  Ancient  Stirling,  Stirling.
81  St.  Mary's,  Callness.
32  St.  John,  Selkirk.
33  Aitchison's-ha'n,  Aitchison's-haven.
34  Aberdeen,  Aberdeen.
35  St:  John,  Falkland.
36  St.  David,  Edinburgh.
37  St.JohnOperativeForres.
38  St.  Michael,  Crieff.
38  Kirkwall  Kilwin-
ning, Orkney.
39  St.  John's,  Kilsyth.
40  St.  Thomas,        Arbroath.
41  St.  Cuthbert  Kil-
winning, Kirkcudbright.
43  St.  John's,  Fort  William.
44  St.  Luke,  Edinburgh.
45  Kilmollymock,    Elgin.
46  St.  John,  Auchterarder.
47  Operative,  Dundee.
48  St.  Andrew,         Edinburgh.
49  Ancient  Dundee,Dundee.
50  St.  John,  Inverary.
51  Loudon,  Newmills.
63  DumfriesKilwin-
ning,  Dumfries.
54  St.  Machar,        Aberdeen.
55  Brodie's,  Dyke.
56  Keith,  Peterhead.
57  St.  John  Kilwin-
ning, Haddington.
58  Kelso,  Kelso.
60  St.  John,  Inverkeithing.
62  Thistle,  Dumfries.
63  St.  Michael,        Dumfries.
65  Stonehaven,        Stonehaven.
66  St.  Ninian,  Brechin.
67  Forbes,  Rosehearty.
(505)

--- Sayfa 518 ---
506
world's  masonic  register.
No.         Lodge.
Location.
No.                LOBOE.
Location.
68  Doric,
Port  Glasgow.
123  St.  James,
Brechin.
69  Alloa  St.  John ,  Alloa.
124  Ayr  Kilwinning,  Kilwinning.
70  St.  Abb,
Eyemouth.
126  St.  Andrew,
Kilmarnock.
72  Kircaldie,
Kircaldie.
127  Thistle,
Stewarton.
73  Thistle  &  Rose ,  Glasgow.
128  St.  John  Shet
74  St.  Andrew,
Perth.
tleston,
Glasgow.
75  Dunbar  Castle, Dunbar.
129  St.  Mirrin,
Paisley.
76  Royal  Arch,
Stirling.
132  St.  Luke,
Lauder.
78  St.  David,
Dundee.
134  Robertson's,
Cromarty.
79  St.  Andrew,
Annan.
135  St.  James,
Tarbolton.
80  Fort  George,
31st  Regiment.
136  St.  Laurence,
Laurencekirk.
81  Musselburg  Kil
137  St.  John,
Blairgowrie.
winning,
Musselburg.
141  St.  John,
Campbelton.
82  St.  Duthus,
Tain.
144  St.  Laurence,
Forres.
85  Kirknewton  and
145  St.  Stephen,
Edinburgh.
Ratho,
Kirknewton.
147  Cadder  Argyle, Chryston,  Glasgow.
86  Navigation,
Troon.
148  Trinity,
Elgin.
87  Thistle,
Glasgow.
149  St.  Andrew,
Irvine.
88  Montrose,
New  Monkland.
150  Operative,
Aberdeen.
89  Morton's,
•  Lerwick.
151  Defensive  Band ,  Edinburgh.
91  Elgin,
Leven.
152  Operative,
Dunkeld.
92  St.  John,
Banff  Seat  own.
153  Royal  Arch,
Pollockshaws.
93  St.  Nicolas,
Aberdeen.
156  St.  Barchan,
Kilbarchan.
97  St.  James  Ope
157  St.  John,
Beith.
rative,
Edinburgh.
158  Thistle  Ope'tive.Dundee.
99  Glammis,
Glammis.
159  Royal  Arch  U'l
a,  3d  Regt.  Dragoons.
100  St.  Magdalene, Lochmaben.
160  Roman  Eagle,
Edinburgh.
101  St.  Vigean,
Arbroath.
161  St.  Stephen,
Gate  house  of  Fleet.
102  St.  Mark,
GLisgow.
162  St.  John,
New  Abbey.
103  Union  &  Crown ,  Glasgow.
164  Old  Aberdeen,
Aberdeen.
104  St.  John's,
Jedburgh.
165  Royal  Arch,
Ayr.
105  St.  John's  Ope-
166 St.  John's,
Airdrie.
rative,
Cupar-Angus.
167  Free  Operatives ,  Biggar.
106  St.  John,
Lindores.
169  Thistle  &  Rose, ,  Stevenston.
107  Eskdale  Kilwin
170  St.  John,
Dumbarton,  Renton
ning,
Langholm.
171  St.  James,
Doune.
108  Fortrose,
Stornoway.
172  St,  Brice,
Kirkcaldy.
110  St.  Audrew,
Aberdeen.
173  St.  John,
Largs.
112  St.  John,
Fisherrow.
174  St.  John,
Dunning.
113  Mount   Stewart
175  St.  John,
Greenock.
Kilwinning,
Greenock.
177  St,  James,
Old  Monkland.
114  Royal  Arch,
Cambuslang.
178  St.  Patrick,
Glasgow.
116  Royal  Arch,
Rutherglen.
179  St.  Mungo,
Mauchline.                  <
117  St.  Mary,
Glasgow.
181  Hopetown,
Bathgate.
118  St.  Bryde,
Douglas.
182  Incorporated
119  St.  John,
Johnshaven.
Kilwinning,
Montrose.
120  St.  Peter,
Montrose.
185  St.  Adrian,
Pittenweem.
121  St.  Cyre,
Auchl  ermuchty .
187  St.  John,
Carluke.
122  Royal  Arch,
Perth.
190  St.  George,
Aberdeen.

--- Sayfa 519 ---
SCOTLAND.
507
No.       Lodge.
Location.
No.            Lodge.
Location.
192  St.  John,
Muthil.
275  Shamrock  and
193  St.  John  Ope-
Thistle,
Bridgeton,  Glasgow.
rative,
Rothes.
280  St.  John,
Coldstream.
195  Caledonian  St.
281  Charlestown,
Aboyne.
John  R.  A.
Campsie.
282  St.  Andrew,
Lochlee.
198  Royal  Arch,
Maybole.
284  St.  Peter,
Thurso.
199  St.  Andrew,
Cumbernauld.
286  Airlie,
Kerriemuir.
201  St.  Thomaa,
Muirkirk.
290  Blairs,
Dairy.
202  St.  Clemente,
Riccarton.
291  Celtic,
Edinburgh  &  Leith.
203  Operative,
Airdrie.
292  St.  John,
Rothesay.
204  St.  Paul,
Ayr  &  Renfrew  Mili'a  298  Hamilton  and  Clydesdale  Operative,
205  St.  Winnoch,
Garthland.
299  Panmure,
Arbroath.
210  St.  Andrew,
Newton-Ayr.
304  KingR.  D'Bruce,Auohtermuchty.
215  St.  Andrew,
Strathaven.
305  St.  John,
Woodhall.
216  Star,
Star  Railway.
306  St.  Thomas,
Larkhall.
217  Cumberland  Kil-
309 Lower,
Forfar.
winning,
Port  Glasgow.
311  Caledonian,
Dunlop.
219  Star,
Glasgow.
312  Bruce  &  Thistle,  Bannockburn.
222  Royal  Thistle,
1st  Regiment.
313  St.  Baldred,
North  Berwick.
224  Innocents,
Cullen.
314  Royal  Arch,
West  Kilbride.
225  Forfar  and  Kin
317  Camperdown,
Dundee.
cardine,
Dundee.
318  Fingal,
Dingwall.
226  Portobello,
Portobello.
320  St.  John  R.  A. Ardrosson.
230  St.  Barnabas,
Old  Cumnock.
326  Clydesdale,
Lanark.
233  Hamilton,
Hamilton.
327  St.  Serff,
Kinross.
234  St.  Peter,
Mousewald.
328  George  William ,  94th  Regiment.
236  St.  John,
Wilsonton  Iron  W'ks.  332  Duntocher  and
237  St.  John,
Girvan.
Flaifley  Union .,  Glasgow.
238  Caledonian,
Annan.
333  St.  George,
Glasgow.
242  Houston,
St.  Johnstone.
334  St.  John,
New  Cumnock.
243  St.  Ninian  Ope -
339  St.  Mary's  Cale
rative,
Nairn.
do'an  Ope'tive,  Inverness.
244  Union,
Stonehouse.
347  St.  JohnOpe'ive,Rutherglen.
245  St.  Andrew,
Glenbuck.
349  St.  Clair,
Edinburgh.
248  Lock'rt  St. John,  Carnwath.
354  Cale'an  Railw'y,Glasgow.
250  Union,
Dunfermline.
360  Commercial,
Glasgow.
252  St.  John,
Thornhill.
362  St.  Clair,
Glasgow.
254  Caledonian,
Dundee.
370  Renfrew  Kilwin-
256 St.  James,
Peterhead.
ning,
Paisley.
257  St  Andrew,
Glenkindy.
374  St.  John,
Crofthead.
258  Quhytwoollen,
Lockerby.
375  Neptune,
Aberdeen.
259  St.  Nathalan,
Tullick-in-Mar.
380  St.  Andrew,
Drybridge,  Crofth'd.
261  Tweed,
Kelso.
384  Athol,
Kirkintilloch.
262  St.  John,
Galashiels.
385  Mi'nto,
Lochgelly.
267  Fraser,
Strichen.
391  Zetland,
Grangemouth.
269  St.  Kessac,
Comrie.
392  Caledonia,
Edinburgh.
270  Thistle,
West-Calder.
395  Royal  Blues,
Kilbirnie.
272  Mid-Calder,
Mid-Calder.
396  Duncarn,
Burntisland.
274  St.  James,
Nethertonholm, Kilmarnock.
33

--- Sayfa 520 ---
508  world's  masonic  register.
SUBSCRIBERS'  NAMES.
Bizzet,  Alexander,  Ironmonger,  Stirling  St.,  Airdrie.  Ancient  Stirling,  30;
Montrose,  New  Monkland,  88;  St.  Andrew's  chap.,  69;  Principal  Z.,  Airdrie
District  chap.,  78.
Braidwood,  James,  Mason,  Langloan,  Coatbridge.  W.  M.,  St.  James,  Old
Monkland,  177.
MacKinnon,  James,  Clerk,  Warwickhill  Colliery,  Kilmarnock,  Ayrshire.  St.
John's,  Airdrie,  166.
MacKinnon,  Peter,  Clerk,  Cairnbrae  Iron  Works,  Coatbridge.  S.  W.,  St.
James,  Old  Monkland,  177;  St.  Andrew's  chap.,  69;  Scribe,  E.  Airdrie  District
chap.,  78.
MacKinnon,  William,  Bagpipe  Maker,  273  George  St.,  Glasgow.  St.  James,
Old  Monkland,  177.
Mure  Steel,  John,  Solicitor,  Bank  St.,  Airdrie.  Argyle,  Glasgow,  76.  W.  M.,
Montrose,  New  Monkland,  88 ;  St.  Andrew's  chap.,  69 ;  Principal  J.,  Airdrie
District  chap.,  78.
Torrance,  Thomas,  Surgeon,  Stirling  St.,  Airdrie.  P.  M.,  Montrose,  New
Monkland,  88;  St.  Andrew's  chap.,  69;  Principal  H.,  Airdrie  District  chap.,  78.
In  a.m.  3416,  Nebuchadnezzar,  King  of  Babylon,  conquered  Jerusalem,  de-
stroyed the  city  and  temple,  carried  away  the  vessels  of  gold,  silver,  and  brass,
and  took  captive  to  Babylon  all  who  were  not  slain  by  the  sword.
•In  a.m.  3466,  Babylon  was  taken  by  Cyrus,  King  of  Persia.
In  a.m.  3464,  Cyrus  issued  his  famous  edict,  according  to  which  the  Israelites
returned  to  Jerusalem.
In  a.m.  3484,  Joshua  and  Zerubbabel,  incited  by  Haggai  and  Zechariah,  go  on
with  the  work  of  rebuilding  the  temple,  and  wall  around  the  City  of  Jerusalem,
which,  by  order  of  Darius,  had  been  interrupted  in  consequence  of  the  jealousy
of  the  Samaritans.
In  a.m.  3489,  the  second  temple  was  finished.

--- Sayfa 521 ---
HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY   IN    FOREIGN   COUNTRIES.  509
HISTORY  AND  ANTIQUITY  OF  FREEMASONRY  IN  FOREIGN
COUNTRIES.
FRANCE.
History  furnishes  us  with  a  very  imperfect  state  of  Freemasonry  in  France ;
however,  we  are  pretty  well  assured  that  the  art  flourished  there  as  early  as  a.d.
126.  Many  of  the  brethren  came  from  England  about  the  year  254,  and  many
more  followed  in  the  year  680.  Under  the  ancient  Gallic  and  Norman  princes,
Masonry  received  very  extraordinary  marks  of  indulgence;  there  is  no  doubt  but
that  the  skill  of  Masons,  which  was  always  great  even  in  the  most  barbarous
times,  their  wonderful  kindness  and  attachment  to  each  other,  how  different
soever  in  condition,  and  their  fidelity  in  religiously  keeping  their  secrets,  must
expose  them,  in  ignorant,  troublesome,  and  superstitious  times,  to  a  vast  variety
of  adventures,  according  to  the  different  fate  of  parties,  and  other  alterations  of
government.  It  is,  however,  to  be  remarked  that  Masons  in  all  countries  have
always  been  loyal,  which  frequently  exposed  them  to  great  severities,  especially
in  the  dark  ages,  when  power  wore  the  trappings  of  justice,  and  those  who  com-
mitted treason  punished  good  men  as  traitors.
In  the  year  1737,  France  followed  the  example  of  Holland  in  disturbing  the
repose  of  the  society ;  though  many  of  the  nobility  had  defended  the  Masonic
Lodges,  and  interested  the  court  in  their  behalf,  yet  they  were  decreed  to  the
same  fate  as  the  united  provinces  of  Holland,  by  reason  that  under  the  pretense
of  the  inviolable  secrets  of  the  Order,  they  might  cover  some  dangerous  design,
which  might  in  the  end  be  not  only  to  the  disadvantage  of  religion,  but  even  of
the  king's  peace.  But  those  days  are  gone  by;  at  this  time,  especially  in  coun-
tries where  freedom  of  conscience  as  regards  religion  is  tolerated,  there  are  none
so  scrupulous  in  regard  to  Masonry  as  they  were  formerly.
The  first  public  Masonic  edifice  built  in  France  was  in  Marseilles,  entitled
"  The  Lodge  of  St.  John ;"  it  was  fifty-eight  feet  long,  thirty  broad,  and  forty-
two  feet  high.  It  was  decorated  with  paintings  of  the  best  artists.  At  the
bottom  of  the  hall,  under  a  gilded  canopy  with  blue  hangings  and  trimmed  with
gold,  is  a  painting  representing  the  Genius  of  Masonry,  supporting  the  portrait
of  the  then  King  of  France,  with  an  inscription  in  Latin  the  translation  of
which  is,  "  The  Masons  at  Marseilles  have  erected  this  monument  of  their  affec-
tion to  their  most  beloved  king."
A  genius  seated  below  the  pedestal  presents  with  one  hand  this  inscription,
and  with  the  other  the  arms  of  the  Lodge,  with  their  motto,  Deo  Regi,  et
Patrice,  Fidelitas,  that  is,  Fidelity  to  God,  our  king,  and  country.  Above  this
is  a  genius  which  crowns  the  king.
To  the  right  of  this  is  another  splendid  painting,  representing  the  wisdom  of
Solomon,  with  this  inscription  above  it,  Prudencia,  i.e.  Prudence.
To  the  left  is  another,  representing  the  courage  of  St.  John  the  Baptist  in
remonstrating  with  Herod  upon  his  debaucheries,  with  this  inscription,  Forti-
tudo,  i.e.  Fortitude.

--- Sayfa 522 ---
510       -  world's  masonic  register.
The  right  side  of  the  hall  is  ornamented  with  paintings  of  equal  grandeur ;
the  first  represents  Joseph  acknowledging  his  brethren,  and  pardoning  them  for
the  ill  usage  he  had  received  from  them,  with  this  inscription,  Venia,  i.e.
Pardon.
The  second  represents  Job  upon  the  dung-hill,  his  house  destroyed,  his  fields
laid  waste  by  storm,  his  wife  insulting  him,  and  himself  calm,  lifting  his  hands
toward  heaven,  with  this  inscription,  Patimtia,  i.e.  Patience.
The  third  represents  St.  Paul  and  St.  Barnabas  refusing  divine  honors  at  Lys-
tra,  with  this  inscription,  Humilitas,  i.e.  Humility.
The  fourth,  Jonathan  when  he  warned  David  to  keep  from  the  city,  in  order
to  avoid  the  danger  which  threatened  his  days,  with  this  inscription,  Amicitia,
i.e.  Friendship.
The  fifth,  Solomon  surveying  the  works  of  the  Temple,  and  giving  his  orders  for
the  execution  of  the  plan  which  his  father,  David,  had  left  him  of  it,  with  this
inscription,  Pietas,  i.e.  Piety.
The  sixth,  St.  Peter  and  the  other  Apostles  paying  tribute  to  Caesar,  by
means  of  the  piece  of  money  found  miraculously  in  the  belly  of  a  fish,  with  this
inscription,  Fidelitas,  i.e.  Fidelity.
The  seventh,  the  charity  of  the  good  Samaritan,  with  this  inscription,  Chari-
tas,  i.e.  Charity.
The  left  side  of  the  hall  contains  three  paintings ;  the  first,  Tobias  curing  his
father,  with  these  words  for  the  inscription,  Filiale  Debitum,  i.e.  Filial  Debt.
The  second,  the  father  of  the  Prodigal  Son,  when  he  embraces  him  and  par-
dons his  offenses,  with  this  inscription,  Obedientia,  i.e.  Obedience.
On  each  side  of  the  door  are  two  paintings  of  equal  grandeur ;  one  represent-
ing the  Apostles  giving  alms  in  common ;  the  inscription  is,  Eleemosyna,  i.e.
Almsgiving.
The  other  represents  Lot  receiving  the  angels  in  his  house,  believing  them  to
be  strangers ;  the  inscription  is,  Hospitalitas,  i.e.  Hospitality.
The  four  corners  of  the  hall  are  decorated  with  four  allegorical  paintings ;  in
one  is  represented  two  geniuses  holding  a  large  medal,  on  which  is  painted
three  pillars  of  a  gold  color,  with  a  motto  in  Latin,  which,  translated,  reads  thus,
"  Here  Virtue,  "Wisdom,  and  Beauty  fixed  their  seat."  In  another,  two  geniuses
holding  a  large  medal,  on  which  is  represented  three  hearts  set  on  fire  by  the
same  flame,  united  by  the  bond  of  the  Order,  with  this  motto,  also  in  Latin,
"  Love  joins  their  hearts,  and  Piety  the  tie."
The  others  are  in  the  same  taste,  but  supported  by  one  genius  only,  of  a  smaller
size.  The  medals  represent  as  follows :  The  first,  three  branches,  one  of  olive,
another  of  laurel,  and  another  of  myrtle,  with  this  motto,  "Here  peace  we  give,
and  here  by  turns  receive."  The  other,  a  level  in  a  hand  coming  from  a  cloud,
placed  perpendicularly  upon  a  heap  of  stones  of  unequal  forms  and  sizes,  with
this  motto,  "  One  equal  law,  of  high  and  low  the  lot."
All  these  paintings  are  of  the  most  exquisite  order.  The  building  was  fin-
ished in  the  year  1765,  having  the  following  inscription  over  the  inner  door  :  —
"  The  Grand  Master  and  Deputy,  and  the  whole  body  of  Freemasons  at  Mar-
seilles, have  erected  these  different  examples  of  the  virtues  and  monuments  of
the  fraternal  liberality,  proposed  to  the  imitation  of  their  brethren,  and  to  the
honor  of  the  Supreme  Architect  of  the  universe,  in  the  year  of  the  light,  5765."

--- Sayfa 523 ---
HISTORY   OF  FREEMASONRY   IN  FOREIGN  COUNTRIES.  511
Most  all  the  Lodges  of  France  consist  of  a  great  number  of  members,  among
whom  are  many  nobles  of  the  land,  and  generally  have  their  kings  and  princes
presiding  over  their  deliberations.  The  greater  number  of  Masons  are  gentle-
men of  the  highest  order  of  talent,  and  officers  under  the  government,  who  do
honor  to  their  several  Masonic  stations.
GERMANY.
The  first  knowledge  of  any  regular  Masonic  Lodge  having  been  instituted  in
Germany  was  in  1738,  although  Masonry  existed  at  a  very  early  date  in  that
country.  It  was  located  at  Brunswick,  under  the  auspices  of  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Scotland,  and  on  the  fifteenth  of  August,  in  the  same  year,  the  then  King  of
Prussia  was  initiated,  who  soon  after  ordered  a  new  Lodge  to  be  opened  in  Ber-
lin. Masonry  then  began  to  flourish,  and  many  other  Lodges  were  instituted  in
the  Prussian  dominions  under  the  royal  auspices.  In  the  year  1740,  the  King
expressed  that  it  would  give  him  great  pleasure  to  have  another  Lodge  opened
in  Berlin,  in  consequence  of  which  Baron  Bielfield  and  the  privy  counselor  Jor-
dan took  that  charge  upon  them,  and  formed  a  Lodge  under  the  denomination
of  the  Three  Globes.  Their  Constitution  bore  date  in  the  month  of  June,  1740,
and  in  the  following  month  Prince  William,  the  Margrave  Charles,  and  the
Duke  of  Holstein  Beck  were  initiated  in  the  new  Lodge,  and  in  a  very  few  years
afterward  there  were  at  least  fifty  new  Lodges,  who  acknowledged  this  Lodge
as  the  .Superior  Grand  Lodge  of  Germany.  When  the  Baron  Bielfield  left  the
King  of  Prussia's  dominions,  who  had  acted  as  the  Grand  Master,  Margrave
Charles  was  elected  in  his  place,  and  on  his  demise  Frederick  Augustus,  Prince
of  Brunswick,  presided  over  the  Craft.  In  the  year  1775,  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Berlin  sent  a  Deputy  to  the  Grand  Assembly,  which  was  held  at  Brunswick,  who
admitted  a  certain  approved  system  planned  by  nine  princes  of  the  empire,
agreeably  to  which  all  the  German  Lodges  were  requested  to  work ;  forty-one
only  entered  into  the  Association,  who  chose  Frederick  Augustus  for  their  Grand
Master.  On  this  occasion  a  splendid  gold  medal  was  struck,  and  presented  by
the  forty-one  reunited  Lodges  to  their  new  Grand  Master ;  on  one  side  of  which
was  represented  the  bust  of  the  Prince,  with  this  inscription  round  it,  Ferdinand
Dux  Bruns.  et  Luneb.;  on  the  other  side,  a  lion  sleeping  under  the  eye  of  Provi-
dence, under  which  are  these  words,  Vide,  Vici,  Quiesco,  and  under  these  the
following :  Ob.  Felic,  Reunion.  Murar.  Ldberor  German.
The  Society,  however,  was  not  free  from  persecutions  in  Germany,  occasioned
by  the  great  jealousy  of  some  ladies  belonging  to  the  Court,  who,  having  en-
deavored by  various  artful  and  crafty  designs  to  get  some  of  their  agents  into
many  of  the  Lodges,  though  without  the  desired  effect,  attempted  to  inflame
the  mind  of  Maria  Theresa,  the  Empress  Queen,  against  the  Society,  and  carried
it  so  far  with  that  Princess  as  to  get  an  order  for  surprising  them  all  in  their
Lodges,  to  revenge  in  as  open  a  manner  as  possible  some  affronts  they  imag-
ined had  been  given  them  by  the  fraternity.    But  the  success  of  their  undertak-

--- Sayfa 524 ---
512  world's  masonic  register.
ing  did  not,  by  any  means,  answer  the  intentions  of  their  diligence  and  industry,
for  no  less  a  personage  than  the  late  Emperor  Joseph  the  First,  the  most  emi-
nent Mason  in  Europe,  instantly  put  a  stop  to  all  their  proceedings  by  declaring
himself  ready  to  answer  for  their  conduct,  and  to  redress  any  plea  that  could  be
alleged  against  them ;  but  that  the  ladies  and  their  abettors  must  find  some
better  foundation  for  complaint,  before  he  should  enter  into  the  merits  of  the
case,  as  what  had  thus  far  appeared  was  only  falsehood  and  misrepresentation.
This  event  might  probably  be  the  reason  that  no  more  Lodges  appear  to  have
been  established  in  Prussia,  under  the  English  Constitution,  previous  to  the
year  1767,  when  a  patent  was  obtained  from  the  Duke  of  Beaufort  to  constitute
a  Lodge  at  Berlin  under  the  name  of  Le  Eoyale  York,  which  name  was  adopted
in  honor  of  the  late  Duke  of  York,  who  was  there  initiated  into  Masonry  during
his  travels.
In  1769,  a  Lodge  was  constituted  at  Brunswick,  by  virtue  of  a  patent  from
England,  which  may  properly  be  called  the  chief  Lodge  in  that  part  of  Ger-
many. The  work  in  Masonry  is  here  conducted  alternately  in  the  German  and
French  languages.  This  Lodge  was  afterward  constituted  a  Grand  Lodge  in
1770,  on  which  occasion  a  very  numerous  and  splendid  company  of  Masons
attended.  The  annual  contributions  of  this  Lodge  for  charitable  purposes  are
on  the  most  extensive  scale.
Prince  Ferdinand  of  Brunswick  generously  consented,  at  that  time,  to  be  the
patron  of  the  Lodge,  and  also  accepted  the  office  of  Master,  and  about  that
time  he  received  a  dispensation  from  England,  empowering  him  to  preside  as
Provincial  Grand  Master  over  all  the  Lodges  in  Lower  Saxony.  Under  this
appointment  a  Deputy  Grand  Master  was  appointed  to  superintend  the  govern-
ment of  the  Lodges.
"We  have  a  German  book  of  Masonry  before  us,  printed  by  Masonic  au-
thority in  1777,  which  calls  the  King  of  Prussia  Protector  of  all  Masons  in
Germany ;  Ferdinand,  Duke  of  Brunswick  and  Lunenburg,  Elected  Grand  Master
of  all  the  United  Lodges  in  Germany;  Duke  Charles,  the  reigning  Duke  of  Bruns-
wick, Protector;  Frederick  Augustus,  Prince  of  Brunswick  and  Lunenburg,
Provincial  Grand  Master  of  all  United  Lodges  in  the  Prussian  dominions ;
Prince  Maximilian  Julius  Leopold,  of  Brunswick  and  Lunenburg,  Deputy  Pro-
vincial Grand  Master ;  Charles,  the  Landgrave  of  Hesse  Oassel,  Provincial
Grand  Master  in  Denmark,  and  Protector  of  the  United  Lodges  in  Hamburg ;
Absalom,  St.  George,  and  Emanuel,  and  Charles  Christian  Joseph,  Duke  of
Courland,  Protector  of  Masons  in  Courland,  etc.  etc.
Since  the  principal  sovereign  Princes,  and  most  all  the  nobility  and  persons
of  eminence  and  distinction  in  Germany  have  long  stood  forth,  and  at  this  mo-
ment are  protectors  and  patrons  of  the  Society  of  Freemasons,  it  is  not  surpris-
ing that  the  Order  flourished  in  a  particular  manner  throughout  that  extensive
empire.  The  harmony  of  the  brotherhood  has,  notwithstanding,  been  greatly
disturbed  a  second,  time  by  the  introduction  of  principles  quite  new  in  Masonry.
The  propagators  of  these  novelties  first  appeared  at  the  conclusion  of  the  war
in  Germany,  and  most  of  them  being  necessitous  persons,  they  in  a  manner  sub-
sisted upon  the  spoils  of  their  deluded  adherents.  They  pretended  to  a  superior
knowledge  in  the  science  of  Masonry,  and  took  upon  themselves  the  appellation
of  the  Reform  of  the  North,  under  which  name  they  assembled  for  some  time ;

--- Sayfa 525 ---
HISTORY   OP   FREEMASONRY   IN   FOREIGN   COUNTRIES.  513
but  at  last  their  principles  were  inquired  into  by  the  true  brotherhood,  and
found  to  be  inconsistent  with  true  and  good  Masonry ;  at  last  it  fell  to  the
ground,  and  is  now  no  more.
In  1768  the  Freemasons  in  Germany  obtained  a  charter,  empowering  them,
legally,  to  convene  their  Lodges,  and  to  transact  the  business  of  their  Society,
from  the  King  of  Prussia,  who  accepted  the  office  of  Grand  Master,  the  Elector
of  Saxony,  and  the  Queen  of  Hungary  and  Bohemia.  This  charter  was  after-
ward ratified  and  confirmed  by  the  greatest  Mason  in  Europe,  the  Emperor  of
Austria.  These  crowned  heads  had  long  experienced  the  great  utility  of  the
Order  in  relieving  the  poor  and  needy  in  their  several  dominions,  in  erecting
schools  and  seminaries  for  orphans  or  deserted  children,  and  in  establishing
funds  for  those  parents  whose  narrow  circumstances  would  not  permit  them  to
provide  for  their  offspring  or  give  them  such  an  education  as  was  necessary  to
render  them  fit  and  useful  members  of  society.
Immediately  after  this  charter  was  obtained,  Masonry  assumed  a  new  form  in
Germany.  The  greatest  part  of  the  Lodges  annihilated  all  their  foreign  Con-
stitutions, and  erected  a  new  Grand  Lodge  at  Berlin,  where  a  fresh  code  of  laws
and  regulations  were  formed.  This  Grand  Lodge  assumed  the  name  of  Mother
Lodge,  and  granted  many  Warrants,  under  the  general  title  of  Strict  Observ-
ance. Several  Lodges  were  constituted  in  different  Provinces.  By  these  laws
it  was  enacted  that  no  person  should  be  made  a  Mason  unless  his  character  was
unimpeachable,  and  his  manner  of  living,  or  his  profession,  respectable ;  that  he
should  pay  twenty-five  rix  dollars  (about  $20)  for  his  initiation  in  the  first  de-
gree, double  that  sum  on  his  being  received  in  the  second,  and  that  again  doubled
on  his  being  made  a  Master  Mason;  that  he  should  remain  at  least  three  months
in  every  degree,  and  that  two-thirds  of  the  sums  so  received  should  be  sent  quar-
terly to  the  Provincial  Lodges,  and  from  thence  annually  to  the  Grand  Lodge ;
the  remaining  third  should  be  appropriated  for  the  expenses  of  the  particular
Lodges,  and  the  accumulation  of  the  two-thirds  of  the  fees  of  every  candidate
for  a  fund  to  be  employed  in  granting  pensions  to  superannuated  Freemasons
according  to  their  several  circumstances.  It  is  greatly  to  be  wished  that  such
a  mode  of  proceeding  was  adopted  everywhere,  and  then  Masonry  would  be  on
a  more  respectable  footing.  The  honor  of  admission,  and  the  privileges  of  the
Order  are  too  low,  and  every  one  can  be  admitted  who  will  pay  the  stipulated
fee.
These  innovations  induced  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  in  1793,  to  form  a
compact  with  the  Prince  of  Hesse  Darmstadt,  the  then  Grand  Master  of  the
Grand  Lodge  at  Berlin,  under  the  title  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Germany.    The
following  is  a  copy  of  the  compact : —
"To  all,  frc:
"  Know  ye,  That  whereas  the  Supreme  Grand  Lodge  of  the  most  ancient  and
honorable  society  of  free  and  accepted  Masons,  situate  at  London,  of  which  the
most  noble  and  right  honorable  Eobert  Edward  Petre,  Lord  Petre,  Baron  of
Writtle,  in  the  County  of  Essex,  is  at  present  Grand  Master,  has  received  au-
thentic testimony  of  the  great  merit  of  many  respectable  brethren  in  the  Empire
of  Germany,  who,  some  years  ago,  (after  making  the  necessary  progress  in  the
ancient  science,)  for  the  well  governing  and  better  carrying  on  the  business  of
the  society  in  those  parts,  convened  together  the  Masters  and  Wardens  of  twelve

--- Sayfa 526 ---
514  world's  masonic  register.
Lodges,  and  established  in  due  form,  according  to  the  ancient  regulations  of  the
Order,  a  Lodge  in  the  City  of  Berlin  under  the  title  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of
Germany,  which  they  have  since  conducted  agreeably  to  the  true  principle  of
Masonry.  And-whereas,  his  Serene  Highness  George  Charles,  Prince  of  Hesse
Darmstadt,  the  present  Grand  Master,  and  others  the  Grand  Officers  of  the  said
Grand  Lodge  at  Berlin,  have,  through  the  fraternal  assistance  of  Brother
Charles  Hanbury  of  Hamburgh,  requested  of  the  Grand  Lodge  at  London  »
confirmation  of  their  title  as  Grand  Lodge  of  the  Empire  of  Germany,  under
such  restrictions  and  regulations  as  may  be  agreed  upon  by  both  parties,  which
request  the  Grand  Lodge  hath,  of  its  very  high  respect  for  his  said  Serene  High-
ness the  Prince  of  Hesse  Darmstadt,  and  others  the  Grand  Officers  at  Berlin,
and  in  order  as  far  as  may  be  to  promote  the  honor  and  universality  of  the  Ma-
sonic Order,  agreed  to  comply  upon  the  restrictions  and  upon  the  conditions
hereinafter  mentioned,  viz. : —
"  1st.  The  Supreme  Grand  Lodge  at  London  doth  hereby  confirm  the  power
and  authority  already  by  them  committed  to  his  Serene  Highness  the  Prince  of
Brunswick  and  Lunenburg,  and  the  territories  thereto  belonging,  within  which
district  the  Grand  Lodge  at  Berlin  is  not  to  have  or  exercise  any  Masonic
authority.
"  2d.  The  Grand  Lodge  at  London  doth  confirm  and  reserve  in  like  manner
the  power  and  authority  committed  to  John  Peter  Gogel,  Esq.,  as  provincial
Grand  Master  for  Franconia,  and  the  upper  and  lower  Bhine,  and  doth  give  to
the  said  John  Peter  Gogel  full  power  also  to  act  under  the  authority  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  Berlin,  should  he  at  any  time  be  desirous  of  so  doing.
"  3d.  The  Grand  Lodge  at  London  doth  hereby  abrogate,  annul,  and  make
void  all  power  and  authority  committed  from  hence  to  Godfried  Jacob  Jenish,
M.D.,  as  provincial  Grand  Master  for  Hamburg  and  Lower  Saxony ;  and  also
all  power  and  authority  committed  to  Count  De  Werthorn,  as  provincial  Grand
Master  for  Upper  Saxony ;  and,  likewise,  all  power  and  authority  committed  to
Major  Agdello,  as  provincial  Grand  Master  for  the  Electorate  of  Saxony;  also
all  power  and  authority  committed  to  Baron  Hammetstein,  as  provincial  Grand
Master  for  "Westphalia ;  and  all  power  and  authority  at  any  time  committed  to
any  other  person  as  provincial  Grand  Master  within  the  Empire  of  Germany,
(except  as  aforesaid.)
"  4th.  That  the  Electorate  of  Hanover  shall  remain  free,  and  each  of  the  con-
tracting Grand  Lodges  shall  exercise  Masonic  jurisdiction  at  pleasure  within
the  said  Electorate.
"  5th.  That  in  consideration  of  the  premises,  and  seeing  an  injury  may  thereby
arise  to  the  fund  of  charity  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  the  Grand  Lodge
of  Germany  doth  voluntarily  promise  to  pay  to  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England
such  a  sum  of  money  annually  as  the  circumstances  and  situation  of  the  said
Grand  Lodge  of  Germany  may  enable  them  conveniently  to  pay  toward  the
general  fund  of  charity,  or  other  Masonic  fund  in  London,  and  such  annual
payment  is  not  to  be  less  than  £26  sterling.
"  6th.  The  Grand  Lodge  at  London  doth,  therefore,  hereby  acknowledge  the
Grand  Lodge  at  Berlin  to  be  the  Grand  Lodge  of  the  whole  Empire  of  Germany,
including  his  Prussian  Majesty's  dominions;  and  doth  hereby  promise  and  agree
not  to  constitute  any  new  Lodges  or  grant  any  other  Masonic  power  from  the

--- Sayfa 527 ---
HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY  IN   FOREIGN    COUNTRIES.  515
date  hereof,  within  the  Empire  of  Germany,  except  only  within  those  districts
reserved  as  aforesaid,  during  the  authority  of  the  present  provincial  Grand
Masters  thereof;  but  said  districts,  at  the  expiration  of  the  present  patents,  or
by  decease  of  the  present  holders,  are  then  to  come  under  the  jurisdiction  of  the
Grand  Lodge  at  Berlin.
"  7th.  The  Grand  Lodge  of  Germany  doth  hereby  agree  to,  and  confirm  in
every  part,  the  several  regulations  before  mentioned  to  be  observed,  maintained,
and  kept  by  each  of  the  contracting  Grand  Lodges  jointly  and  severally,  agree-
ably to  the  true  meaning  and  extent  thereof.
"  8th.  The  Grand  Lodge  of  Germany  doth  also  hereby  promise  and  agree,  in
consideration  of  the  premises,  not  to  constitute  any  new  Lodges  or  grant  any
other  Masonic  power  or  authority  from  the  date  hereof,  except  within  the  Em-
pire of  Germany,  and  in  strict  conformity  to  this  agreement.
"  Lastly.  The  said  two  contracting  Grand  Lodges  do  hereby  mutually  agree
to  keep  a  regular  amicable  correspondence  with  each  other,  and  to  afford  all
possible  assistance,  each  to  the  members  of  the  other  Grand  Lodge ;  to  do  and
transact  whatever  may  be  found  most  likely  to  contribute  to  the  true  interest
and  honor  of  the  Society,  and  particularly  to  use  their  endeavors  to  destroy  all
schemes  in  Masonry,  and  particularly  that  sect  of  Masons  who  call  themselves
'  The  Strict  Observance,'  whose  principles  are  inconsistent  with  true  Masonry.
Sealed  with  the  seal  of  the  Grand  Lodge  in  London,  October  20,  5773.
"  Petee,  G.  M.
"  Charles  Didlon,  D.  G.  M.
"J.  Gkoft,  S.  W.
"  Jos.  Feed.  Gillio,  J.  "W.
"Witness,  J.  Heseline,  G.  S.
"  Ratified  in  Berlin,  October  30th,  5773."
This  compact  being  approved  of  by  the  King  of  Prussia,  who  was  thereupon
most  graciously  pleased  to  create  the  said  Grand  Lodge  at  Berlin  a  corporate
body.
HOLLAND.
Freemasonry  is,  without  doubt,  of  very  ancient  standing  in  the  Netherlands,  as
lying  so  commodiously  near  both  France  and  Germany ;  but  we  can  only  inform
our  readers  that  the  Koyal  Art  was  very  flourishing  in  the  year  1735,  when  the
States  General  were  the  first  among  the  powers  of  Europe  who  took  notice  of
the  Freemasons.  Finding  that  they  held  their  Lodges  in  almost  every  great
town  under  their  government,  they  began  to  be  exceedingly  alarmed.  It  was
judged  impossible  that  architecture  could  be  the  only  motive  of  these  associa-
tions ;  they,  therefore,  were  determined  to  discover,  if  possible,  the  real  inten-
tions of  their  meeting.  In  1731  a  Lodge  was  opened  at  the  Hague,  under  the
warrant  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England ;  it  was,  however,  only  a  Lodge  of  emer-
gency, having  been  called  to  initiate  the  Duke  of  Tuscany,  afterward  Francis  I.,
Emperor  of  Germany.  After  the  ceremony  had  been  performed  by  the  Earl  of
Chesterfield,  the  Lodge  was  closed.    The  first  regular  Lodge  of  which  we  have

--- Sayfa 528 ---
516  world's  masonic  register.
any  record,  was  established  at  the  same  place  in  1734,  which,  five  years  after,
took  the  name  of  the  Mother  Lodge.  In  1735  a  Lodge  was  opened  in  Amster-
dam, and  on  the  18th  of  December,  1757,  a  National  Grand  Lodge  was  estab-
lished.
In  1735  the  authorities  of  the  Netherlands  issued  an  edict,  intimating  that
although  they  had  not  discovered  anything  in  the  behavior  or  practices  of  the
fraternity  called  Freemasons  contrary  to  the  peace  of  the  republic,  or  to  the
duty  of  good  subjects,  they  were,  nevertheless,  resolved  to  prevent  any  bad  con-
sequences that  might  ensue  from  such  conventions,  and  therefore  commanded
that  these  congregations  and  assemblies  should  be  entirely  abolished  !  Notwith-
standing this  ordinance,  a  Lodge,  composed  of  several  very  respectable  gentlemen,
continued  to  meet  at  a  private  house  in  Amsterdam.  The  magistrates,  getting
intelligence  of  it,  ordered  the  whole  Lodge  to  be  arrested.  The  day  following
the  magistrates  assembled  at  the  State  House,  and  ordered  the  Master  and
Wardens  of  the  Lodge  to  be  brought  before  them,  who  solemnly  declared,  upon
oath,  that  Freemasons  were  the  most  peaceable  subjects,  faithful  to  their  prince,
and  true  to  their  country ;  that  the  greatest  union  prevailed  among  them ;  that
they  were  strangers  to  hypocrisy  and  deceit;  that  pleasure  was  reciprocally
communicated  in  their  several  assemblies  by  the  cheerful  observance  of  every
obliging  office,  and  that  the  institution  was  truly  venerable.  They  informed  the
magistrates  that  they  could  not  explain  their  particular  secrets  and  ceremonies,
but  that  they  could  assure  them  they  were  neither  contrary  to  moral  or  divine  law.
That  they  would  willingly  receive  any  of  their  number  among  them,  and  would,
no  doubt,  be  ready  and  willing  to  satisfy  them  more  particularly  in  regard  to
what  they  had  explained.  Upon  this  the  brethren  were  discharged,  and  the
Town  Secretary  was  appointed  to  attend  the  Lodge.  He  was  accordingly  ini-
tiated, and  on  his  return  to  the  State  House  gave  such  a  satisfactory  account  in
favor  of  the  society,  that  in  a  very  short  time  afterward  the  whole  body  of  the
magistracy  became  Free  and  Accepted  Masons,  and  continue  to  be  so  to  this
day,  having  a  Lodge  solely  of  their  own  order.
In  1738  another  Lodge  was  instituted  at  the  Hague,  in  which  "William  VI.,
Prince  of  Orange,  was  initiated.  In  1740,  Masonry  was  again  most  furiously
attacked  by  the  whole  body  of  the  clergy,  who  resolved,  at  all  events,  to  sup-
press the  society ;  but  their  endeavors  proved  abortive.  The  following  anecdote
will  show  to  what  a  pitch  they  carried  their  malice  :  Two  young  officers,  of  very
good  families,  who  were  Masons,  applied  to  the  minister  of  the  parish  in  which
they  resided  to  examine  them  in  certain  points  of  religion,  agreeable  to  the  cus-
tom of  the  country,  and  then  to  grant  them  a  certificate  to  entitle  them  to  receive
the  holy  sacrament.  After  the  examination  had  ended,  and  the  priest  satisfied
in  regard  to  their  capacity,  he  asked  them  if  they  were  Freemasons?  Being  an-
swered in  the  affirmative,  he  refused  to  grant  them  their  certificates,  which,  in
that  country,  is  an  expulsion  from  the  communion.  This  transaction  raised  an
uproar  in  Holland,  and  numbers  of  pamphlets  were  published  for  and  against
Masonry.  At  last  the  Grand  Assembly  of  the  States  General  took  it  into  their
consideration,  and  ordered  that  for  the  future  no  clergyman  should  ask  either
that  or  any  other  question  regarding  Freemasonry,  in  the  execution  of  his  eccle-
siastical duty,  and  ordered  the  priest,  before  whom  the  two  officers  had  been
examined,  immediately  to  grant  them  their  certificates.

--- Sayfa 529 ---
HISTORY   OP   FREEMASONRY   IN   FOREIGN   COUNTRIES.  51 T
This  proved  a  favorable  introduction  to  the  progress  of  Masonry  in  Holland,
so  that  in  a  few  years  a  number  of  Lodges  were  constituted  throughout  the
seven  United  Provinces,  some  under  the  patronage  of  England,  but  many  more
under  that  of  Scotland.  However,  in  1779,  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Holland,  held
at  the  Hague,  entered  into  a  compact  with  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  by
virtue  of  which  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Holland  granted  Constitutions  in  their  own
dominions,  both  at  home  and  abroad,  and  have  Provincial  Grand  Masters  in  each
Province,  as  also  in  India,  Cape  of  Good  Hope,  St.  Eustasia,  Saba,  St.  Martin,
and  Surinam,  etc.
It  may  be  justly  remarked  of  the  German,  Dutch,  and  French  Lodges,  that
many  of  them  far  surpass  in  elegance  and  splendor  the  greatest  part  of  the
Lodges  under  the  English  Constitutions.  On  their  public  festivals  no  expense
is  spared  to  support  the  honors  of  Masonry.  Their  halls  are  furnished  in  the
most  superb  taste,  and  are  hung  round  with  the  richest  tapestry.  The  places
set  apart  for  the  reception  of  Masons  are  covered  with  crimson  velvet,  and  the
throne  on  which  the  Master  is  seated  is  enriched  with  embroidery  and  gold;  and
on  the  reception  of  a  Fellow  Craft  to  the  degree  of  a  Master  Mason,  the  Lodges
are  hung  round  with  black  velvet !  In  short,  it  is  difficult  to  conceive  the  mag-
nificence of  their  decorations.  The  dress  of  the  members  is  suitable  to  the
grandeur  of  the  Lodge,  and  their  polite  behavior  would  not  disgrace  the  first
court  in  Europe.  On  these  occasions  Masonry  is  illustrated  in  pathetic  orations,
delivered  by  men  of  genius  and  learning ;  and  this,  added  to  the  harmony  of
some  pieces  of  music,  executed  by  several  different  bands  of  the  best  perform-
ers, strike  the  audience  with  awe  and  reverence,  and  impress  the  mind  with  a
just  idea  of  the  dignity  of  Masonry.
DENMARK  AND  SWEDEN.
Though  Masonry  was  not  introduced  into  these  Northern  Kingdoms  so  early
as  into  those  already  described,  yet  the  Royal  Art  has  flourished,  and  the  Lodges
are  at  present  numerous  in  the  Cities  of  Copenhagen  and  Stockholm.  The  first
Lodge  in  Copenhagen  was  instituted  by  a  patent  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scot-
land in  the  year  1743,  and  is  now  the  Grand  Lodge  of  that  kingdom.  The
society  meet  in  a  superb  hall,  richly  ornamented,  built  for  the  purpose  in  1761.
There  are  also  many  Lodges  in  the  Danish  West  India  possessions,  under  the
Constitution  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Copenhagen.
The  first  Lodge  in  Stockholm  was  likewise  instituted  by  a  patent  from  Scot-
land in  the  year  1754,  and  is  at  present  the  Grand  Lodge  of  that  kingdom,
and  from  which  many  new  Lodges  have  been  constituted.  The  business  of
the  fraternity  is  therefore  regularly  and  amicably  conducted  in  both  kingdoms.
Masonry  is  conducted  in  these  Northern  regions  in  the  same  elegant  manner  it
is  in  Germany,  where  none  but  men  of  merit  can  be  admitted.  This  is  the  rea-
son that  they  have  so  few  poor  brethren,  consequently  they  are  better  enabled
to  relieve  the  wants  of  all  strangers  who  apply,  in  a  very  ample  manner.    The  fra-

--- Sayfa 530 ---
518  world's  masonic  register.
ternity  is  recognized  by  the  State,  and  the  reigning  kings  have  always  been  the
Grand  Masters.
Danish  gentlemen  of  veracity  and  deep  research  assure  us  that  the  ancient  in-
scriptions upon  rocks,  as  mentioned  by  antiquarians  and  historians,  are  Masonic
hieroglyphics,  generally  thought  to  be  the  old  and  original  manner  of  writing,
before  the  use  of  paper  of  any  kind,  and  waxen  tables  were  found.  These  char-
acters are  Runic,  and  so  imperfectly  understood  by  the  learned  themselves,  that
their  meaning  is  very  uncertain,  but  they  are  imagined  to  be  historical.  Should
they  ever  prove  to  be  Masonic  hieroglyphics,  as  it  is  imagined,  and  very  highly
probable,  Masonry  must  bear  a  much  earlier  date  in  Scandinavia  than  is  men-
tioned aboye,  although  until  now  no  earlier  record  can  be  found.
RUSSIA.
Of  the  Order  in  Russia,  at  the  present  time,  very  little  is  known,  as  the  late
autocrat  was  opposed  to  secret  societies ;  but  it  will  afford  our  readers  a  pleas-
ure to  know  that  in  former  years  the  benign  influence  of  our  noble  institution
flourished  in  that  country,  which  is  of  immense  extent,  being  greater  than  all
the  rest  of  Europe,  or  even  the  Roman  Empire  in  the  zenith  of  its  power,  or
even  the  Empire  of  Darius  subdued  by  Alexander,  or  both  put  together.  But
Freemasonry  has  always  kept  pace  with  the  cultivation  of  the  arts,  sciences,  and
civilization.
The  first  regular  Lodge  ever  formed  in  this  extensive  empire  was  as  early  as
the  year  1739,  in  the  reign  of  Lord  Raymond ;  and  a  second,  called  The  Lodge
of  Perfect  Union,  in  St.  Petersburg,  constituted  in  June,  1791.  The  Master
and  most  of  the  members  of  this  Lodge  were  English  merchants,  resident  there,
who  supported  this  new  establishment  with  zeal.
As  many  of  the  Russian  nobility  and  also  of  the  gentry  were  Freemasons  at
the  time  of  the  establishment  of  the  above  Lodge,  some  of  them,  in  the  year
1772,  applied  for  and  obtained  a  patent  from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  ap-
pointing his  Excellency  John  Yelaguire,  Senator,  Privy  Councellor,  member  of
the  Cabinet  of  Her  Imperial  Majesty  the  Empress  of  Russia,  the  Provincial
Grand  Master  for  the  Empire  of  Russia ;  and  such  were  the  zealous  attentions
of  that  nobleman,  that  several  Charters  were  granted  for  Lodges  established
at  St.  Petersburg,  Moscow,  Rega,  Yassy.  and  various  parts  of  Courland,  which
is  subject  to  Russia.  The  first  nobility  in  the  Empire  not  only  countenanced
the  Royal  Art,  but  acted  as  officers  of  the  Grand  and  Subordinate  Lodges;
and  the  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  of  Russia,  at  that  time,  in  imitation  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England,  erected  a  splendid  hall  for  the  purpose  of  holding
their  assemblies.
But  very  little  is  known  at  the  present  time  of  the  state  of  the  Order ;  under
the  rule  of  the  autocrat  no  such  institution  was  publicly  permitted,  although
there  is  no  doubt  that  there  were  many  Lodges  held  in  secret.

--- Sayfa 531 ---
HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY   IN  FOREIGN  COUNTRIES.  519
SPAIN,  PORTUGAL,  AND  ITALY.
The  first,  and,  we  believe,  the  only  Lodge  ever  firmly  established  in  Spain,  was
by  a  deputation  sent  to  Madrid  to  constitute  a  Lodge  in  that  city,  under  the
auspices  of  Lord  Ooleraine,  a.d.  1727,  which  continued  under  English  jurisdic-
tion till  the  year  1776,  when  it  refused  that  subordination  which  it  owed  to  the
Grand  Lodge  of  England,  but  continued  to  meet  under  its  own  authority.
As  early,  however,  as  the  year  1726,  a  Lodge  was  formed  in  Gibraltar,  an
English  garrison,  and  in  the  following  year  another  was  established  in  the  Prov-
ince of  Andalusia.  The  persecution  of  the  priests  and  the  rules  of  the  .Catholic
Church  were  always  obstacles  to  the  successful  propagation  of  Masonry  in  this
kingdom.  Lodges,  nevertheless,  exist  and  work  in  various  parts  of  Spain,  but
their  places  of  meeting  are  known  to  none  but  Masons.
Several  Lodges  existed  in  Lisbon,  by  Constitutions  from  France,  as  early  as
the  year  1727  ;  but,  in  1742,  the  Inquisition  of  that  country  imprisoned  Brother
Alexander  James  Monton,  a  French  artist,  and  John  Coustos,  u,  native  of  Bern,
in  Switzerland,  for  being  Freemasons.  The  father  of  the  latter  came  into  Eng-
land in  1716,  and  was  naturalized.  The  crimes  brought  against  them  by  that
horrid  tribunal  were :  That  they  had  infringed  the  pope's  orders  by  their  belong-
ing to  the  Society  of  Freemasons,  which  society  was  a  horrid  compound  of  sac-
rilege, sodomy,  and  many  other  abominable  crimes,  of  which  the  inviolable
secrecy  observed  therein,  and  the  exclusion  of  ladies,  were  but  too  manifest  in-
dications ;  a  circumstance  which  gave  the  highest  offense  to  the  whole  king-
dom; and  the  said  Monton  and  Coustos  having  refused  to  discover  to  the  Inqui-
sition the  true  tendency  and  design  of  the  Masonic  meetings,  and  persisting,  on
the  contrary,  in  asserting  that  Freemasonry  was  good  in  itself,  wherefore  the  Proc-
tor of  the  Inquisition  required  that  the  said  prisoners  should  be  prosecuted  with
the  utmost  rigor,  and  for  that  purpose  desired  that  the  court  would  exert  its
whole  authority,  and  even  proceed  to  tortures,  to  extort  from  them  a  confession,
viz.,  that  the  several  articles  of  which  they  stand  accused  are  true.  Brother
Coustos  underwent  the  several  tortures  three  times,  and,  on  his  confessing
nothing,  was  sentenced  to  walk  in  the  procession  of  the  auto-de-f6,  and  to  be  a
galley-slave  for  four  years ;  when  His  Majesty  George  II.,  ever  attentive  to  the
felicity  of  his  subjects,  through  the  kind  offices  of  the  Duke  of  New  Castle,
despatched  commands  to  Mr.  Compton,  the  British  Minister  at  Lisbon,  to  de-
mand his  liberty  of  the  King  of  Portugal,  in  his  Britannic  majesty's  name,
which  was  accordingly  obtained  in  October,  1744,  after  a  dismal  confinement  of
two  years  and  eight  months.  But  what  became  of  Brother  Monton  has
remained  a  secret  till  this  very  day.
These  proceedings  caused  universal  terror  among  the  brethren,  which  obliged
them  to  assemble  alternately  at  the  private  houses  of  chosen  friends,  instead  of
taverns,  where  they  were  liable  to  be  detected.
In  the  year  1776,  Major  FranQois  D'Allincourt,  a  French  gentleman,  and  Don
Ayres  de  Ornellus  Pracao,  a  Portuguese  nobleman,  were  sent  to  prison  by  the
Governor  of  the  Island  of  Madeira,  for  being  Freemasons.     They  were  afterward

--- Sayfa 532 ---
520  world's  masonic  register.
sent  prisoners  to  Lisbon,  and  confined  in  a  common  jail  for  fourteen  months,
where  they  would  absolutely  have  perished,  had  not  the  brethren  in  Lisbon  gen-
erously supported  them,  and  by  whose  intercession  with  Don  Martinio  de  Mello
they  were  at  last  released.  There  are  several  Lodges  in  that  kingdom  :  a  very
respectable  one  in  Lisbon,  one  at  Oporto,  and  a  third  at  Zetubal.  One,  how-
ever, of  the  influences  of  the  French  invasion  was  the  dissemination  of  Freema-
sonry among  the  Portuguese ;  and  there  are  now,  or  have  been  lately,  not  fewer
than  four  Grand  Lodges  existing  in  that  kingdom.
In  the  year  1738,  the  Court  of  Eome,  instigated  by  the  impositions  of  evil-
minded  persons,  poured  out  its  bulls*  and  decrees  against  the  Society  of  Free-
masons, whereby  they  were  condemned  in  a  more  severe  and  tyrannical  manner
(the  peculiar  character  of  the  Inquisition)  than  they  had  ever  yet  undergone  in
any  nation,  and  that  without  the  least  foundation  for  such  proceedings — his
holiness  the  pope  being  utterly  ignorant  of  what  was  so  zealously  to  be  interdicted.
To  give  the  reader  an  idea  how  our  brethren  were  persecuted,  (and  notwith-
standing the  accusations  and  clamor  of  the  Roman  Catholic  clergy,  our  brethren
remained  faithful  to  the  society,  and  even  to  this  day  there  are  many  Lodges
throughout  Italy,  who  perform  their  Masonic  duties  in  alleviating  the  distresses
of  their  brethren  and  doing  good  unto  all,)  we  here  insert  the  pope's  bull
against  Freemasonry : —
"It  has  come  to  our  knowledge,  even  from  public  report,  that  certain  socie-
ties, companies,  meetings,  assemblies,  clubs,  or  conventicles,  commonly  called
Be  Liberi  Muratori,  (Freemasons,)  or  by  whatsoever  name  the  same  in  different
languages  are  distinguished,  spread  far  and  wide,  and  are  every  day  increasing;
in  which  persons,  of  whatever  religion  or  sect,  contented  with  a  kind  of  affected
show  of  natural  honesty,  confederate  together  in  a  close  and  inscrutable  bond,
according  to  laws  and  orders  agreed  upon  between  them ;  which  likewise,  with
private  ceremonies,  they  enjoin  and  bind  themselves,  as  well  by  a  strict  oath  taken
on  the  Bible,  as  by  the  imprecation  of  heavy  punishments,  to  preserve  with  invio-
lable secrecy.  .,
"We,  therefore,  resolving  in  our  mind  the  great  mischiefs  which  generally
accrue  from  these  kind  of  societies  or  conventicles,  not  only  to  the  temporal  tran-
quillity of  the  State,  but  to  the  spiritual  health  of  souls ;  and  that,  therefore,  they
are  neither  consistent  with  civil  or  canonical  sactions,  since  we  are  taught  by
the  Divine  Word  to  watch,  like  a  faithful  servant,  night  and  day,  lest  this  sort
of  men  break  as  thieves  into  the  houses,  and  like  foxes  endeavor  to  root  up  the
vineyards;  lest  they  should  pervert  the  hearts  of  the  simple,  and  privately  shoot
at  the  innocent;  that  we  might  stop  up  the  broad  way  which  from  thence  would
be  laid  open  for  the  perpetration  of  their  wickedness  with  impunity;  and  for
other  just  and  reasonable  causes  to  us  known,  have,  by  the  advice  of  some  of
our  venerable  brethren  of  the  Roman  Church,  the  cardinals,  and  of  our  own
mere  motion,  and  from  our  own  certain  knowledge  and  mature  deliberations,  by
the  plenitude  of  the  apostolical  power,  appointed  and  decreed  to  be  condemned
and  prohibited,  and  by  this  our  present  ever  valid  constitution,  we  do  condemn
and  prohibit  the  said  societies,  companies,  meetings,  assemblies,  clubs,  or  conven-
*  Bulls  are  letters  published  by  the  pope,  having  the  same  power  as  an  edict  or
law  in  other  countries.

--- Sayfa 533 ---
HISTORY   OF   FREEMASONRY   IN   EOREIGN   COUNTRIES.  521
tides,  De  Liberi  Muratori,  (Freemasons,)  or  by  whatever  name  they  are  distin-
guished or  known.
"  Wherefore  all  and  singular  the  faithful  in  Christ,  of  whatever  state,  degree,
condition,  order,  dignity,  and  pre-eminence,  whether  laity  or  clergy,  as  well  sec-
ulars as  regulars,  worthy  all  of  express  mention  and  enumeration,  we  strictly,
and  in  virtue  of  holy  obedience,  command  that  no  one,  under  any  pretext  or
color,  dare  or  presume  the  aforesaid  societies,  Be  Liberi  Muratori,  (Freema-
sons,) or  by  whatever  other  name  or  manner  distinguished,  to  enter  into,  pro-
mote, favor,  admit,  or  conceal  in  his  or  their  houses,  or  elsewhere,  or  be
admitted  members  of,  or  be  present  with  the  same,  or  in  anywise  aiding  and
assisting  toward  their  meeting  in  any  place,  or  to  administer  anything  to  them,
or  in  any  means  publicly  or  privately,  directly  or  indirectly,  by  themselves  or
others,  afford  them  counsel,  help,  or  favor;  or  advise,  induce,  provoke,  or  per-
suade others  to  be  admitted  into,  joined,  or  be  present  with  these  kind  of  socie-
ties, or  in  any  manner  aid  or  promote  them ;  but  that  they  ought  by  all  means
to  abstain  from  the  said  societies,  under  the  penalty  of  all  that  act  contrary
thereto  incurring  excommunication  ipso  facto,  without  any  other  declaration,
from  which  no  one  can  obtain  the  benefit  of  absolution  from  any  other  but  us,
or  the  Roman  Pontiff  for  the  time  being,  except  at  the  point  of  death,  etc.  etc.
"  Dated  from  Rome,  at  St.  Mary's  the  Greater,  in  the  year  of  the  incarnation
of  our  Lord,  1738,  the  fourth  year  of  the  Calends  of  May,  (twenty-eighth  of
April,  N.  S.,)  in  the  eighth  year  of  our  pontificate.
"A.  Card,  Vice  Detory.
"C.  Amatus,  Vice  Secretary.
"Visa  de  Curia,
"N.  Antoneixus.  "S.  B.  Engenius."
Another  edict,  bearing  date  the  14th  day  of  January,  1739,  and  of  the  same
stamp  with  the  above  bull,  adding  a  fine  of  1000  crowns  in  gold,  besides  other
grievous  punishments,  the  galleys  not  to  be  excepted,  to  be  inflicted  at  pleasure,
on  being  made,  or  on  having  any  manner  of  connection  with  the  Freemasons,  etc.
The  decree  bore  date  February  18th,  1739,  condemning  a  certain  book  written
in  French,  small  in  its  size,  but  most  wicked  in  regard  to  its  bad  subject,  entitled
"  The  History  of,  and  an  Apology  for  the  Society  of  Freemasons,"  printed  at
Dublin,  in  1739.  This  book  was  ordered  to  be  burned  publicly  by  the  ministers
of  Justice,  in  the  street  of  St.  Mary's  Supra  Minervam,  on  the  25th  of  February,
1739.  In  1777,  several  Freemasons  were  imprisoned  at  Naples,  but  afterward
released  through  the  intercession  of  several  foreign  princes,  and  the  justice  of
their  cause  was  exemplified  by  an  Italian  advocate.
Notwithstanding  these  abominable  infractions  upon  human  liberty,  and  being
thus  oppressed  in  the  ecclesiastical  State,  the  fraternity  found,  and  still  find,  a
safe  retreat  in  many  parts  of  Italy,  who  being  better  enlightened  than  those  of
Rome,  did  not  by  any  means  oppose  the  spreading  and  propagauding  an  art
founded  on  the  most  exalted  maxims  of  sound  morality,  and  which  could  not
but  tend  to  the  greatest  advantage  in  every  part  of  the  globe.
We  find  a  record  of  a  Lodge  having  existed  in  Florence  in  1733,  established
by  Lord  Charles  Sackville,  the  son  of  the  Duke  of  Dorset;  and  even  at  this
period,  most  of  the  Italian  nobility,  and  some  ecclesiastics,  notwithstanding  the
popish  interdictions,  are  Freemasons,  and  ardent  admirers  of  the  art,  practicing

--- Sayfa 534 ---
522  world's  masonic  register.
its  charity  and  virtues ;  they  are  proverbial  for  their  liberality  to  the  poor  and
needy,  of  whatever  country  or  clime,  and  many  Lodges  are  in  existence  in
Naples,  Leghorn,  Venice,  Verona,  Turin,  Messina,  Sicily,  Genoa,  and  Modena,
but  their  meetings  are  kept  in  secret  places ;  this,  with  the  interdiction  of  the
papal  government  and  secular  authorities,  prevents  us  from  giving  our  readers
any  of  their  proceedings.
SWITZERLAND,  HUNGARY,  POLAND,  AND  BOHEMIA.
As  early  as  1737,  a  Provincial  Grand  Lodge  of  the  fraternity  was  established
at  Geneva,  under  the  authority  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England,  on  a  patent  to
Sir  George  Hamilton,  and  a  few  years  afterward  a  warrant  was  granted  for  a
Lodge  to  be  situated  in  Lausanne.  The  fraternity  continued  to  enjoy  peace  and
tranquillity  in  Switzerland  until  1745,  when  a  cloud  arose  that  threatened  a  heavy
storm,  nor  was  it  less  than  to  root  out  and  extirpate  the  hitherto  unshaken  and
immovable  foundations  of  Masonry,  and  at  once  to  overthrow  the  superb  struc-
ture that  had  been  erected  for  many  ages.  None  can  be  ignorant  that,  after  the
example  of  most  parts  of  Europe,  the  Swiss  Cantons  received  the  Freemasons
among  them,  and  afforded  them  the  most  civil  treatment  equal  to  their  merit.
The  eagerness  with  which  all  ranks  of  people  applied  themselves  to  what  might
aggrandize  that  illustrious  body,  has  served  as  a  pattern  for  all  other  nations  in
Europe  who  value  themselves  for  the  brightness  of  their  understanding  or  love
for  the  liberal  arts.  What  fatal  destiny,  what  fanatical  fury,  could  transport
the  magistrates  of  Berne  to  become  the  enemies  of  Masonry ;  the  enemies  of  a
Society  who  never  had  done  them  wrong,  or  been  impeached  of  one  unworthy
deed  ?  Was  it  then  that  innocence,  capable  everywhere  of  curbing  the  most  fierce
and  malignant  dispositions,  could  make  no  impression  upon  the  callous  hearts
of  these  sage  republicans  ?  No !  The  cruel  prejudices  with  which  they  armed
themselves  against  the  noble  craft  had  caused  them  to  publish  an  ordinance  for
their  abolition,  containing  assertions  as  unjust  as  ill-founded  against  the  peace-
able Society  of  Freemasons,  who,  as  they  asserted,  had  slyly  and  artfully  crept
into  that  country.  To  show  to  our  readers  how  our  brethren  were  persecuted
in  those  days,  we  give  a  copy  of  the  famous  edict  issued  by  the  authorities  of
Berne  against  the  fraternity.
"  We,  the  advoyer,  the  little  and  great  Council  of  the  City  and  Eepublic  of
Berne,  make  known  to  all  men  by  these  presents,  having  learnt  that  a  certain
Society  called  Freemasons,  spreads  itself,  every  day  more  and  more,  into  all  the
cities  and  towns  under  our  government,  and  that  the  persons  who  have  joined
the  said  Society  are  received  under  various  solemn  engagements,  and  even  by
oath ;  wherefore,  having  seriously  reflected  upon  the  consequences  thereof,  and
considered  that  such  meetings  and  associations  are  directly  contrary  to  the  fun-
damental laws  and  constitutions  of  our  country,  and  in  particular  to  the  protec-
tion required  on  our  part  to  discountenance  any  assemblies  under  our  government
without  our  knowledge  and  express  permission  ;  moreover,  it  has  appeared  to  us,
that  if  an  effectual  remedy  was  not  immediately  taken,  the  consequence  of  that
neglect  might  be  dangerous  to  the  State.     For  these  reasons,  and  through  our

--- Sayfa 535 ---
HISTORY   OP   FREEMASONRY  IN   FOREIGN   COUNTRIES.  523
paternal  affection,  as  much  for  the  public  good  as  the  private  advantage  of  all
our  citizens  and  subjects,  we  have  found  it  absolutely  necessary  to  dissolve  and
totally  abolish  the  said  Society,  which  we  do  by  these  presents,  and  henceforth,
forever,  we  forbid,  annul,  and  abolish  it  in  all  our  territories  and  districts,  to  all
persons  that  now  are  or  shall  hereafter  come  into  our  dominions  ;  and  we  do  in
the  first  place  ordain  and  decree,  that  all  those  our  citizens  and  subjects  who
are  actually  known  to  be  Freemasons,  shall  be  obliged  immediately  to  abjure,
by  oath,  the  engagements  they  ha,ve  taken  in  the  said  Society,  before  the  bailiff
of  the  districts  where  they  reside,  without  delay.  And  as  to  our  own  citizens
and  subjects  who  actually  are  Freemasons,  and  not  publicly  known  to  be  such,
and  who  nevertheless  at  present  reside  in  our  dominions,  or  may  hereafter  come
under  our  obedience,  our  sovereign  will  and  pleasure  is,  that  those  who  shall  be
found  in  our  dominions  shall  be  bound  to  renounce  their  obligations  in  the  space
of  one  month  from  this  date,  and  those  who  are  absent  must  submit  to  the  same
terms,  to  be  reckoned  from  the  date  of  their  return  ;  not  only  to  accuse  them-
selves, but  to  abjure  and  renounce  their  engagements ;  those  who  present  them-
selves in  our  capital  city  to  the  reigning  advoyer,  and  in  other  cities  or  in  the
country  to  the  bailiff  of  the  place,  and  from  them  they  shall  receive  assurances
of  safety  to  their  persons  if  they  abjure  and  renounce  their  obligations  without
delay,  in  the  same  form  that  all  other  Masons  are  obliged  to  do.
"  Upon  failure  of  any  part  hereof,  they  shall  undergo  the  punishment  here-
after declared.  But  to  the  end  that  no  person  shall  dare,  for  the  time  to  come,
to  entice,  tempt,  solicit,  or  be  so  enticed,  tempted,  or  solicited  to  engage  him  or
themselves  into  this  same  Society  of  Freemasons,  we  have  thought  fit  to  ordain
and  decree  as  follows  : —
"That  all  those  Masons  who  shall  hold  their  assemblies  in  our  dominions,  or
who  shall  entice,  tempt,  or  solicit  others  into  their  assemblies  or  associations,  as
well  as  all  our  citizens  and  subjects  in  our  dominions,  and  elsewhere,  as  also
those  who  have  been  set  at  liberty,  shall  for  the  future  frequent  such  assemblies,
they  shall  all  and  every  one  of  them  be  subject  to  the  fine  of  100  crowns  with-
out remission  ;  and  likewise  be  deprived  of  whatever  place,  trust,  benefit  or
employment  they  shall  now  hold ;  and  if  they  have  no  present  employment  or
office,  shall  be  rendered  incapable  of  holding  any  such  for  the  time  to  come.
And  touching  the  place  or  Lodge  where  this  kind  of  assemblies  are  held  for  the
future,  the  person  or  persons  who  shall  let  or  furnish  them  with  a  house,  room,
or  place  for  the  holding  of  such  Lodge,  shall  likewise  be  fined  100  crowns,  one-
third  of  which  shall  belong  to  the  informer,  one-third  to  the  bailiff  of  the  place,
and  one-third  to  the  Hospital  or  Fund  of  the  Poor  where  such  assembly  shall
be  held.  Let  it  be  further  understood  that  all  persons  who  shall  after  conviction
emigrate  from  our  dominions  in  order  to  evade  the  fine,  shall  remain  banished
from  our  dominions  forever,  or  till  said  fine  is  paid,  on  pain  of  death.  We  more-
over reserve  at  pleasure  to  punish,  with  more  or  less  rigor,  according  to  the  case
of  the  person  so  rendering  himself  up  to  our  sovereign  pleasure,  or  those  who,
notwithstanding  their  abjuration,  shall  have  again  entered  into  the  Society,  or
frequent  any  of  their  assemblies.
"We  further  ordain  and  command  that  all  ministers  of  justice  do  cause  these
presents  to  be  published  in  all  our  churches,  and  to  be  placarded  in  the  accus-
tomed places.    Given  in  Grand  Council,  March  3, 1745."
34

--- Sayfa 536 ---
524  world's  masonic  register.
From  this  attack,  however,  thanks  to  the  Grand  Architect  of  the  universe,
Masonry  revived  in  1764,  when  the  bodies  resumed  their  labors  under  the  guid-
ance of  a  Grand  Lodge  at  Geneva.  But  Switzerland,  like  France,  has  been  sorely
visited  with  Masonic  dissensions,  and  there  at  one  time  existed  two  or  three
conflicting  Grand  Lodges;  within  a  few  years,  however,  a  reconciliation  has
taken  place,  and  the  brethren  now  all  acknowledge  the  authority  of  the  National
Grand  Lodge  of  Switzerland,  situate  at  Berne,  who  now  exercise  Masonic  juris-
diction under  the  name  of  Alpine ;  their  constitution  is  similar  to  that  of  Great
Britain,  but  only  recognizes  the  three  degrees  of  Ancient  Craft  Masonry.
From  Poland  we  have  no  certain  data.  When  the  first  Lodge  was  erected,
in  1739,  it  was  suppressed  by  an  edict  of  Augustus  the  Third,  so  that  it  must
have  existed  before  that  time.  In  1781  it  revived  under  the  auspices  of  the
Grand  Lodge  of  France,  who,  on  the  application  of  some  Lodges  at  Warsaw,-
Lodges  were  constituted  at  Wilna,  Dubno,  Posen,  Grodno,  etc.
In  1784  these  Lodges  all  united  and  formed  a  Grand  Lodge,  whose  location
was  at  Warsaw.  Although  under  the  dominion  of  the  Czar  of  Russia,  we  are
credibly  informed  Masonry  is  in  a  flourishing  condition  in  Poland.
In  Bohemia  the  first  Lodge  was  instituted  in  Prague,  in  1749,  under  a  Con-
stitution from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Scotland ;  hence  all  Bohemian  Masons  call
themselves  Scotch  Masons,  having  been  initiated  in  what  they  term  the  Scotch
rite.  Most  all  the  leading  men  residing  in  Prague  are  Masons,  and  they  are
very  tenacious  whom  they  admit  among  themselves,  and  by  which  means  they
are  probably  the  most  select  of  men  in  any  part  of  the  globe.  A  Scotch  officer
in  the  Prussian  service  was  taken  prisoner  at  the  battle  of  Lutzen,  who,  with
three  hundred  and  seventy-eight  more  men,  were  conveyed  to  Prague;  the
Scotchman  made  himself  known  as  a  Mason,  and  was  immediately  released  from
confinement,  had  the  honor  to  dine  daily  at  the  tables  of  the  most  distinguished
men  of  the  city,  was  always  requested  to  be  present  at  their  assemblies,  and
desired  to  consider  himself  a  Freemason,  and  not  a  prisoner  of  war.  On  the
exchange  of  prisoners,  which  happened  about  three  months  afterward,  the  Scotch
gentleman  was  in  the  politest  manner  presented  with  a  purse  of  sixty  ducats  to
defray  his  expenses  to  his  regiment,  besides  being  overloaded  with  many  kind
marks  of  remembrance  of  his  Bohemian  brethren.
Were  we  to  follow  this  noble  example  of  the  brethren  in  Prague,  and  be  as
tenacious  whom  we  admit  within  our  portals,  it  would  elevate  the  Masonic  char-
acter far  beyond  what  it  now  is;  but  our  over-anxiety  to  do  good, and  to  make  all
applicants  participants  of  our  noble  institution,  often  has  led  us  to  overstep  the
boundary  of  prudence.  To  our  readers,  we  beg  to  impress  the  good  result  which
jnust  follow  the  noble  example  of  our  Bohemian  brethren.
From  Hungary,  we  have  nothing  certain  of  the  existence  of  the  first  Lodge.
During  the  struggle  for  independence  there  were  many  Lodges,  and  several  of  the
refugees  who  lately  arrived  in  the  United  States  were  received  in  our  Lodges
as  members  of  the  great  family.  Since  it  is  again  under  the  iron  sway
of  the  Austrian  monarch,  it  is  hardly  to  be  presumed  they  are  permitted  to
labor  in  the  work  of  charity.  A  better  day,  we  hope,  is  in  store  for  our  Hunga-
rian brethren;  and  we  trust  a  rich  harvest  will  be  reaped  from  the  seed  which
we  have  sown  among  the  refugees,  and  to  all  those  who  landed  on  our  shores,
and  did  not  belong  to  the  fraternity,  who  were,  during  their  sojourn,  initiated
into  our  mysteries.  May  the  Grand  Architect  speed  them,  is  our  present  prayer.

--- Sayfa 537 ---
HISTORY   OK   FREEMASONRY   IN   FOREIGN   COUNTRIES.  525
FLANDERS  AND  BRABANT.
Considering  the  vicinity  of  these  places  to  France  and  Holland,  Masonry  does
not  flourish  there  as  might  be  expected,  partly  on  account  of  the  Roman  Oath-
olic  religion  being  the  prevalent  one  in  those  countries.  We  have,  however,  a
record  of  the  establishment  of  a  Lodge  in  the  City  of  Ghent,  as  early  as  1721,
and  another  at  Mons,  in  the  year  1730.  There  are,  in  these  States,  several
Lodges,  some  acknowledging  the  jurisdiction  of  England,  Scotland,  Prance,
and  Holland,  from  whom  they  received  their  charters.  The  original  Lodge  of
"Perfect  Union"  was  afterward  directed  into  a  Grand  Lodge.  The  present
Grand  Lodge  of  Belgium  has  its  seat  at  Brussels.  In  short,  we  have  very  little
knowledge  of  the  Craft  in  the  above  countries,  which  latterly  have  been  merged
into  the  Kingdom  of  Belgium,  and  trust  at  some  future  period  to  lay  before  our
readers  a  more  succinct  account  of  the  doings  of  our  Order.  We  refer  them  to
our  lists  of  Lodges  in  Belgium  and  Holland.
ASIA.
The  first  Lodge  of  Freemasons  was  established  by  a  patent  from  England,  by
Sir  George  Pomfret,  in  1728,  in  Calcutta.  Another  was  formed  in  Bengal,  in
1740,  and  in  1779  there  were  Lodges  in  Madras,  Bombay,  Bencoulen,  Fort
George,  China,  Fort  Marlborough,  Batavia,  Ceylon,  Patna,  etc.  etc.  From  the
first  Constitution  granted  to  form  a  Lodge  in  Asia,  in  1728,  Masonry  has  flour-
ished in  that  extensive  division  of  the  globe  in  a  very  extraordinary  manner,
principally  under  the  authority  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.  Some  few  are
under  the  jurisdiction  of  France,  and  several  subject  to  Holland.  The  great
harmony,  good  behavior,  and  rectitude  of  life  among  the  brethren  has  induced
some  of  the  mighty  native  princes  of  the  East  to  become  members  of  the  fraternity.
On  the  5th  of  February,  1777,  at  a  Quarterly  Communication  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  England,  Brother  Graham,  of  the  Lodge  of  Trichniopoly,  near  Madras,
reported  that  his  Highness  Omdit  ul  Omrah  Bahaudre,  eldest  son  of  the  Nabob
of  the  Carnatic,  had  been  initiated  into  Masonry  at  Trichinopoly,  and  professed
the  greatest  veneration  for  our  noble  institution.
It  was,  therefore,  resolved  that  a  complimentary  letter  be  sent  to  his  highness,
accompanied  with  a  Masonic  apron,  elegantly  decorated,  and  a  book  of  consti-
tutions, bound  in  a  most  superb  manner.
The  letter  and  presents  were  intrusted  to  the  care  of  Sir  John  Day,  then  going
out  as  Advocate-General  to  Bengal,  who  executed  his  commission  to  the  univer-
sal satisfaction  of  the  society;  and  the  following  letter  was  by  him  written  to
his  highness,  as  an  introduction : —
"May  it  please  yowr  Highness  :
"The  undersigned,  having  been  honored  with  the  commands  of  the  Grand
Lodge  of  Freemasons  of  Great  Britain  to  convey  to  your  highness  an  apron  and
book  of  constitutions,  a  testimony  of  their  respect  for  you  and  your  illustrious

--- Sayfa 538 ---
526  world's  masonic  register.
father,  the  steadfast  friend  and  ally  of  their  sovereign,  as  well  as  of  the  satisfao  .
tion  they  feel  at  seeing  so  exalted  a  name  enrolled  among  their  Order,  intended
to  have  executed  the  commission  with  which  he  is  charged  in  a  manner  that
might  best  answer  the  intention  of  his  constituents,  and  the  dignity  and  import-
ance of  the  occasion.
"It  so  happens,  however,  that  the  late  dissensions  in  this  settlement  have  so
rent  asunder  every  link  of  social  life,  and  have  so  effectually  dissolved  the  ties
of  amity  and  confidence  which  once  subsisted  among  them,  that  even  the  frater-
nal bond  of  Masonry  has  been  annihilated  in  the  general  wreck.
"For  this  reason  the  Lodge  has  so  long  discontinued  its  meetings,  that  it  may
be  said  to  be  now  nearly  extinct.
"In  this  situation  of  things,  it  being  impossible  to  invest  your  highness  in  full
Lodge,  and  with  the  splendor  and  solemnity  suited  to  the  dignity  of  your  char-
acter and  the  importance  of  the  commission  he  is  honored  with,  the  subscriber
hopes  your  highness  will  condescend  to  accept  (in  the  only  manner  that  remains)
the  pledge  of  amity  and  respect  from  your  brethren,  the  Masons  of  England,
that  accompanies  this.
"  I  remain,  with  the  most  profound  respect,
"  Tour  highness'  most  humble  and  devoted  servant,
"John  Day."
His  highness  subsequently  returned  an  answer  to  the  Grand  Lodge,  in  the
Persian  language,  elegantly  decorated,  and  inclosed  in  cloth  of  gold.  The  ori-
ginal is  framed  and  glazed,  and  now  embellishes  the  walls  of  the  Freemasons'
Hall  in  London.
Masonry  still  exists  in  Asia  Minor,  and  all  the  English  settlements.  The
Lodges  are  at  present  in  a  very  flourishing  condition,  and  hold  their  charters
from  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.
TURKEY.
Very  little,  at  present,  is  known  of  the  state  of  the  fraternity  in  that  region.
As  early  as  the  year  1338,  several  Masonic  Lodges  existed  in  that  country,  and
were  situated  at  Constantinople,  Smyrna,  and  Aleppo ;  and  no  doubt  that  during
the  Crusades,  Masonry,  under  the  guidance  of  the  Knights  of  Malta  and  the
Templars,  was  firmly  established  in  that  empire.  Of  their  present  existence  we
have  no  correct  information.
OCEANICA.
In  a  late  periodical,  we  find  that  in  1828  many  Lodges  existed  in  these  remote
regions,  especially  at  Sidney,  Paramatta,  Melbourne,  and  in  fact  in  every  country
where  either  the  British  or  American  flag  had  shown  itself,  it  being  characteristic
of  the  Saxon  race  to  enlighten  and  promote  the  welfare  of  the  great  human
family.

--- Sayfa 539 ---
HISTORY   OP   FREEMASONRY   IN   FOREIGN   COUNTRIES.  527
AFRICA.
Africa,  the  third  grand  division  of  the  globe,  is  an  extensive  peninsula,
joined  to  Asia  by  a  neck  of  land  about  sixty  miles  over,  between  the  Red  Sea
and  the  Mediterranean,  usually  called  the  Isthmus  of  Suez.  Africa  once  con-
tained several  Kingdoms  and  States,  eminent  for  the  liberal  arts,  for  wealth  and
power,  and  extensive  commerce.  The  Kingdoms  of  Egypt  and  Ethiopia  in
particular  were  much  celebrated,  and  the  rich  and  powerful  State  of  Carthage,
that  once  formidable  rival  to  Rome  itself,  extended  her  commerce  to  every  part
of  the  known  world ;  even  the  British  shores  were  visited  by  her  fleets,  till  Juba,
who  was  a  King  of  Mauritania,  but  tributary  to  the  Republic  of  Carthage,  un-
happily called  in  the  Romans,  who,  with  the  assistance  of  the  Mauritanians,
subdued  Carthage,  and,  by  degrees,  all  the  neighboring  Kingdoms  and  States.
Though  it  is  beyond  dispute  that  the  Greeks  derived  all  their  knowledge  from
the  ancient  Egyptians,  yet  scarce  a  vestige  of  it  remains  among  their  descend-
ants. This  is,  I  presume,  owing  to  the  bigotry  and  superstition  of  their  Mo-
hammedan masters  ;  but  here  it  is  proper  to  make  one  observation,  which  is  of
general  use.  The  Saracens,  who  subdued  Egypt,  were  of  three  kinds :  the  first,
who  were  the  immediate  successors  of  Mohammed,  made  war,  from  conscience  and
principle,  upon  all  kinds  of  literature  and  knowledge  excepting  the  Alkoran  ;
and  hence  it  was  that  when  they  took  possession  of  Alexandria,  which  con-
tained the  most  magnificent  library  the  world  ever  beheld,  its  valuable  manu-
scripts were  applied  for  some  months  in  cooking  their  victuals  and  warming
their  baths.  The  same  fate  attended  upon  the  other  magnificent  libraries  of
Egypt.  The  Saracens  of  the  second  race  were  men  of  taste  and  learning,  but
of  a  peculiar  strain.  They  bought  up  all  the  manuscripts  that  survived  the
general  conflagration  relating  to  astronomy,  medicine,  and  some  parts  of  phi-
losophy ;  but  they  had  no  taste  for  the  Greek  arts  of  architecture,  sculpture,
painting,  and  poetry,  and  learning  was  confined  to  their  own  courts  and  colleges
without  ever  finding  its  way  back  to  Egypt.  The  lower  race  of  Saracens,  espe-
cially those  who  called  themselves  Egyptian-Saracens,  disgraced  human  nature ;
and  the  Turks  have  riveted  the  chains  of  barbarous  ignorance  which  they  im-
posed. Thus,  among  them,  many  valuable  remains  of  Egyptian  Masonry  have
been  destroyed ;  nevertheless,  we  are  in  some  measure  indebted  to  the  ancient
Egyptians  for  many  of  our  mysteries  and  customs.
We  have  no  records  at  hand  from  which  we  can  give  the  present  state  of  the
fraternity  in  that  distant  land,  but  as  early  as  1736,  under  the  auspices  of  the
Earl  of  Loudon,  a  Lodge  was  constituted  at  James'  Fort,  under  a  warrant  from
the  Grand  Lodge  of  England.  In  1773  a  Lodge  was  constituted  at  the  Cape  of
Good  Hope  under  the  sanction  of  the  Grand  Lodge  of  Holland ;  and  another
was  constituted  in  the  Island  of  Mauritius ;  another  in  the  Island  of  Madagascar ;
another  at  St.  Helena ;  and  in  the  northern  part  of  Africa,  along  the  Mediter-
ranean coast,  nearly  every  seaport  has  a  Masonic  Lodge.  Since  the  conquest
of  Algiers  by  the  French  many  new  ones  have  been  added.

--- Sayfa 540 ---
528  world's  masonic  register.
MASONRY  IN  BUENOS  AYRES.
BY  FINLAY  M.  KINO.
Recent  difficulties  in  the  jurisdiction  of  Peru,  as  well  as  those  with  which
our  brethren  of  Buenos  Ayres  have  had  to  contend,  lead  me  to  remark  that  the
fraternity  of  the  United  States  should  be  very  charitable  in  the  opinions  they
may  form  of  Masonry  in  those  distant  climes.  Masonic  fidelity  has  often  im-
periled the  lives  of  our  brethren  in  both  the  countries  referred  to.  It  is  the  sub-
ject of  rejoicing  that  a  change  is  taking  place.  The  highest  ranks  of  society,
and  very  many  of  the  government  officers  in  Peru,  Brazil,  Buenos  Ayres,  and
even  in  Uruguay,  are  contributing  to  the  fraternal  band,  and  joining  their  names
and  efforts  to  its  progress  and  prosperity.
It  was  not  long  since  that  I  fell  in  company  with  an  intelligent  and  enterpris-
ing merchant  from  Buenos  Ayres,  who  had  long  been  a  member  of  our  frater-
nity, and  he  gave  me  many  interesting  facts  in  connection  with  Masonry  in  that
region.  It  appears  there  are  thirteen  different  Lodges  in  the  jurisdiction  of
Buenos  Ayres,  having  in  all  about  3000  members.  They  are  under  the  supreme
control  of  the  Grand  Orient  of  Uruguay,  practicing  the  Scottish  rite.
A  few  years  since,  the  Roman  Catholic  Bishop  of  that  country  fulminated  a
bull  against  all  Masons  within  his  bishopric,  and  he  went  the  length  of  declar-
ing the  marriage  contract  dissolved,  and  absolving  the  wife,  a  vinculo  matri-
monii, in  all  cases  where  the  husband  refused  to  renounce  Masonry.  Some
parties,  as  high  in  temporal  authority  as  the  bishop  was  in  spiritual,  appealed
from  his  decree  to  his  Holiness  Pius  IX.,  at  Rome.  After  waiting  a  long  time
for  a  reply  or  decision  upon  the  appeal,  and  receiving  none,  an  inquiry  was  insti-
tuted as  to  the  cause  of  the  delay,  when  it  was  found,  to  the  great  satisfaction
of  the  Roman  Catholics  of  the  La  Platte,  who  were  unwilling  to  bow  to  the  be-
hests of  the  bishop,  that  during  a  sojourn  at  Montevideo,  in  1816,  the  venerable
prelate  at  Rome,  then  a  young  man,  received  the  degrees  and  took  upon  him-
self the  obligations  of  Masonry !  The  successor  of  St.  Peter  could  by  no
means  violate  the  vows  he  had  thus  taken  in  his  early  years.  The  result  was
that  the  bull  of  the  Buenos  Ayrean  bishop  fell  harmless  to  the  ground,  and  the
Grand  Orient  of  Uruguay  is  in  as  successful  operation  as  ever.  Masonry  has
taken  a  new  start  in  the  Argentine  Confederacy,  and  its  republican  tendencies
have  not  only  relaxed  the  grasp  and  tyranny  of  the  priesthood,  but  have  exer-
cised a  powerful  influence  in  ameliorating  the  condition  and  elevating  the  stand-
ard of  society.  Such  is  ever  the  influence  of  Masonry  when  allowed  to  work
out  its  own  mission,  unfettered  by  the  chains  of  political  and  ecclesiastical
despotism.
Port  Byron,  N.  Y.,  July,  1860.

--- Sayfa 541 ---
FRANCE.
GRAND  ORIENT  DE  FRANCE  A  PARIS.
No.                       Lodge.
Location.
1  Du  Tr.  111.  Gr.  Mait.  del  l'Ordre,
Paris.
2  Les  Admirateurs  de  l'Univers,
Paris.
3  Amis  Bienfaisants  et  Imitateurs  d'Osiris  Keunis,
Paris.
4  Amis  de  la  Paix,
Paris.
5  Amis  de  la  Patrie,
Paris.
6  Amis  de  l'Ordre,
Paris.
7  Amis  Fideles,
Paris.
8  Amis  Triomphantes,
Paris.
9  Amitie,
Paris.
10  Athenee  Francais,
Paris.
11  Bonaparte,
Paris.
12  Bouclier  Francais  et  les  Philonomes  Beunis,
Paris.
13  Olemente  Amitie,
Paris.
14  Cceurs  Unis,
Paris.
15  Cosmopolites,
Paris.
16  Disciples  de  Fenelon,
Paris.
17  Disciples  Ecossais  du  Heros  de  l'Humanite,
Paris.
18  Emules  de  Hiram,
Paris.
19  Enfants  de  Hiram,
Paris.
20  Fraternite  des  Peuples,
Paris.
21  Freres  Unis  Inseparables,
Paris.
22  Henry  IV.
Paris.
23  Hospitaliers  FranQais,
Paris.
24  Isis  Montyon,
Paris.
25  Jerusalem  des  Vallees  Egyptiennes,
Paris.
26  Mars  et  les  Arts,
Paris.
27  Perseverante  Amitie,
Paris.
28  Rose  du  Parfait  Silence,
Paris.
29  Saint  Antoine  du  Parfait  Contentement,
Paris.
30  Saint  Pierre  de  Vrais  Amis,
Paris.
31  Saint  Pierre  de  Vrais  Experts,
Paris.
32  Sincere  Amitie,
Paris.
33  Temple  des  Amis  de  l'Honneur  Francais,
Paris.
34  Tolerance,
Paris.
35  Union  Parfaite  de  la  Perseverance,
Paris.
(529)

--- Sayfa 542 ---
530
world's  masonio  register.
Lodge.
36  L'Etoile  Polaire,
37  Trinosophes  de  Bercy,
38  Saint  August  de  la  Bienfaisance,
39  Franche  Union,
40  La  Perseverance,
41  Saint  Pierre  des  Acacias,
42  Les  Amis  de  1'Humanite,
43  L'Union  Philanthropique,
44  Les  Zeles  Philanthropes,
45  Le  Globe,
46  La  Triple  Unite,
47  Les  Amis  de  la  Paix,
48  L'Etoile  de  la  Charente,
49  Les  Vrais  Zeles,
50  Les  Vrais  Amis  Reunis,
51  L' Amitie  Bienfaisante,
52  La  Parfaite  Armonie  Franchise,
53  Les  Vrais  F.  F.
54  Sincerite  Parfaite  Union  et  Constante
Amitie  Reunis,
55  La  Beunion  des  Amis  Choisis,
56  Les  Enfant  Unis  par  la  Verite,
57  La  Bienfaisance,
58  L'Unite  des  Arts  et  Metiers,
59  Les  Amis  Beunis,
60  LAnglaise,
61  La  Candeur,
62  Les  Chevaliers  de  la  Fraternite,
63  L'Essence  de  la  Paix,
64  L'Etoile  de  la  Gironde,
65  La  Franchise  d'Aquitaine,
66  La  Francaise  elue  Ecosse.-.  et  l'Amitie  Reunis,
67  Les  Francs  Chev.\  de  Saint  Andre  d'Ecosse,
68  La  Sincerite,
69  La  Triangle,
70  Themis,
71  Themis,
72  L'Ecole  des  Mceurs,
73  La  Parfaite  Amitie,
74  Harmonie  Universelle,
75  Les  Amis  Fideles,
76  Les  F.  F.  Discrets,
77  L'Honneur  Frangais,
78  Jean  la  Fontaine,
79  Freres  Sinceres,
80  La  Fidelite,
Barignolles  Monceux.
Bercy.
Boulogne.
Choisy-le-Roy.
Ivri-sur-Seine.
Montmartre.
Montrouge.
Saint  Denis.
Vaugirard.
Vincennes.
Alby,  Tarn.
Angouleme,  Charente.
Angouleme,  Charente.
Auxerre,  Yonne.
Avignon,  Vaucluse.
Bar-le-Duc,  Meuse.
Bastia,  Corse.
Bergerac,  Dordogne.
Besangon,  Doubso.
Beziers,  Herault.
Beziers,  Herault.
Blaye,  Gironde.
Blois,  Loir-et-Cher.
Bordeaux,  Gironde.
Bordeaux,  Gironde.
Bordeaux,  Gironde.
Bordeaux,  Gironde.
Bordeaux,  Gironde.
Bordeaux,  Gironde.
Bordeaux,  Gironde.
Bordeaux,  Gironde.
Bordeaux,  Gironde.
Bordeaux,  Gironde.
Bordeaux,  Gironde.
Caen,  Calvados.
Cambria,  Nord.
Cannes,  Var.
Carpentras,  Vaucluse.
Castres,  Tarn.
Cette,  Herault.
Charleville,  Ardennes.
Chateaudun,  Eure-et-Loir.
Chateau-Thiery,  Aisne.
Cognac,  Charente.
Colmar,  Haut-Rhin.

--- Sayfa 543 ---
FRANCE.
531
No.
Lotos.
Location.
81  Auguste  Amitie,
82  Paix  et  Travail,
83  Esperance  Couronnee,
84  Le  Val  d' Amour,
85  Parfaite  Union,
86  La  Trinite,
87  La  Vertu,
88  Orion,
89  La  Vraie  Reunion  Desiree,
90  DAmenite,
91  Les  Trois  II,
92  Le  Phenix,
93  L'Bcole  de  la  Morale,
94  Ceres  et  les  Amis  de  1' Agriculture,
95  La  Prudente  Amitie,
96  Nature  et  Philanthropic,
97  LAsile  du  Sage,
98  La  Candeur,
99  Les  Enfant  d'Hiram,
100  Etoile  et  Oompas,
101  La  Parfait  Silence,
102  Simplicite  Constance,
103  La  Sincere  Amitie,
104  Union  et  Conflance,
105  Bienfaisance  et  Amitie,
106  Les  Arts  Reunis,
107  La  Franchise  de  St.  Napoleon,
108  La  Reunion  des  Amis  Choisis,
109  Les  Enfants  d'Hiram,
110  La  Parfaite  Union,
111  Le  Commandeurs  du  Phenix,
112  Les  Amis  Fideles,
113  Les  Amis  Reunis  Dans  la  Bonne  Foi,
114  L'Humanite,
115  La  Parfaite  Harmonie,
116  Mars  et  les  Arts,
117  Paix  et  Union,
118  LAmitie  Discrete,
119  Esperance  et  Progress,
120  Purete  des  Cceurs,
121  L'Humanite,
122  Parfaite  Regularite,
123  L'  Heureuse  Reunion  de  Mars  et  des  Arts
124  Les  Amis  de  la  Parfaite  Union,
125  Saint  Jean  des  Arts  de  la  Regularite,
126  De  Triomphe  de  la  Amitie,
Condom,  Gers.
Dammartin,  Seine-et-Oise.
Dieppe,  Seine-Inferieiire.
Dole,  Jura.
Douai,  Nord.
Dunkerque,  Nord.
Dunkerque,  Nord.
Gailac,  Tarn.
Gray,  Haut-Saone-
Le  Havre,  Seine-Inferieure.
Le  Havre,  Seine-Inferieure.
Joigny,  Yonne.
Lebourne,  Gironde.
Lunjumeau,  Seine.
Lons-le-Saulnier,  Jura.
Lorient,  Morbihan.
Lyon,  Rhone.
Lyon,  Rhone.
Lyon,  Rhone.
Lyon,  Rhone.
Lyon,  Rhone.
Lyon,  Rhone.
Lyon,  Rhone.
Lyon,  Rhone.
Lyon  Croix  Rousse,  Rhone.
Macon,  Saone  et-Loire.
Marseilles,  B.-du-Rhone.
Marseilles,  B.-du-Rhone.
Melun,  Seine-et-Marne.
Moissac,  Tarn-et-Garonne.
Montbrison,  Loire.
Montpellier,  Herault.
Montpellier,  Herault.
Moulins,  Allier.
Mulhouse,  Haut-Rhin.
Nantes,  Loire-Inferieur.
Nantes,  Loire-Inferieur.
Neauphle-le- Chateau,    Seine-et-
Oise.
Neuville,  Rhone.
Neuville,  Vienna.
Nevers,  Nievre.
Nogent-sur-Seine,  Aube.
,  Parthenay,  Deux-Sevres.
Perpignan,  Pyren.  Orient.
Perpignan,  Pyren.  Orient.
Pertuis,  Vaucluse.

--- Sayfa 544 ---
532
•world's  masonic  register.
No.
Lodge.
127  Les  Amis  du  Peuple,
128  La  Sincerite,
129  La  Parfaite  Union,
130  Le  Bcossais  Roannais,
131  L' Accord  Parfaite,
132  L'Union  Parfaite,
133  L'Union  des  Deux  Cantores,
134  Les  Arts  Reunis,
135  La  Parfaite  Egalite,
136  La  Perseverance  Couronne,
137  LaVerite,
138  Les  Fideles  d'Hiram,
139  L'Industrie  et  l'Amitie,
140  Montyon,
141  LesEhis,
142  La  Bonne  Foi,
143  L'Bgalite  Regeneree,
144  La  Bienfaisance,
145  La  Concorde,
146  L'Union  Philanthropique,
47  La  Consolante  Amitie,
148  Les  Preres  Eeunis,
149  Reunion  de  la  Sagesse,
150  La  Reunion,
151  Les  Coeur  Reunis,
152  La  Constance,
152  L'Encyclopedique,
154  La  Francaise  de  St.  Joseph  des  Arts,
155  La  Parfaite  Hannonie,
156  L'Union  Sincere,
157  Les  Vrais  Amis  Reunis,
158  Parfait  Egalite,
159  Les  Demophiles,
160  L'Union  Fraternelle,
161  L'Humanite  de  la  Drome,
162  L'Etoile  Neustrienne,
163  Les  Amis  Philanthropes  et  Discrets
Reunis,
164  La  Concorde,
165  La  Perseverance,
166  Les  Fils  d'Adam,
167  Triple  Union  et  Amitie,
168  Saint  Louis  de  la  Martinique,
169  Les  Solitaires,
Pontoise,  Seine-eK)ise.
Rheims,  Marne.
Rennes,  Ille-et-Vilaine.
Roanne,  Loire.
Rochefort,  Charente  Inferieure.
La  Rochelle,  Charente  Inferieure.
Romans,  Drome.
Rouen,  Seine-Inferieure.
Rouen,  Seine-Inferieure.
Rouen,  Seine-Inferieure.
Rouen,  Seine-Inferieure.
Rucil,  Seine-et-Oise.
Sable,  Sarthe.
Saintes,  Charente  Inferieure.
Saint  Etienne,  Loire.
Saint  Germain-en  Laye,  Seine-et-
Oise.
Saint  Sean  d'Angely,  Charente
Inferieure.
St.  Malo,  Ule-et-Vilaine.
Sens  Yonne.
Sevres,  Seine-et-Oise.
Sezanne,  Marne.
Strasbourg,  Bas-Rhin.
Thor,  Vancluse.
Toulon,  Var.
Toulouse,  Haut  Garonne.
Toulouse,  Haut  Garonne.
Toulouse,  Haut  Garonne.
Toulouse,  Haut  Garonne.
Toulouse,  Haut  Garonne.
Toulouse,  Haut  Garonne.
Toulouse,  Haut  Garonne.
Toumon,  Ardeche.
Tours,  Indre-et-Loire.
Troyes,  Aube.
Valence,  Drome.
Vernon-sur-Seine,  Eure.
Versailles,  Seine-et-Oise.
Vienne,  Isere.
Vienne,  Isere.
Villeneuve-sur-Lor,  Lor-et-Ga
ronne.
Voiron,  Isere.
Paris,  Seine.
Sigean,  Aude.

--- Sayfa 545 ---
FRENCH  COLONIES.
533
FRENCH  COLONIES.
ALGERY.
Lodge.
Location.
Belisaire,
Alger.
L'Oasis,
Batna.
Le  Freres  de  1' Atlas,
Blidah.
Hippone,
Bone.
Les  Freres  de  Julia  Csesarea,
Cherchel.
Saint  Yincent  de  Paul,
Constantine.
Les  Freres  du  Sahel,
Douera.
Scipion,
Jigelli.
Les  Freres  du  Nador,
Medeah.
Freres  du  Zackar,
Milianah.
Les  Trinosophes  Africains,
Mostaganem.
L'Union  Africaine,
Oran.
Les  Freres  du  Bousellam,
Setiff.
La  Fratemite  Carteniene,
Tenez.
SENEGAL.
La  Parfaite  Union.
ILLE  DE  LA  EEUNION.
La  Amitie.
Saint  Denis.
FRENCH  INDIES.
L'Union  Indienne,
Pondichfery.
FRENCH  ANTILLES.
Saint  Jean  d'Ecosse,
Guadaloupe,  Basse-Terre.
LaPaix,
Guadaloupe,  Pointe-a-Pitre.
Les  Disciples  d'Hiram,
Guadaloupe,  Pointe-a-Pitre.
La  Fratemite,
Marie  Galande.
La  Trigonometrie,
Martinique,  Fort  Boyal.
La  Concorde,
Martinique,  Saint-Pierre.
La  Harmonic,
Martinique,  Saint-Pierre.
La  Eeunion  des  Arts,
Martinique,  Saint-Pierre.
Sante-Trinite,
Martinique.
FRENCH  GUYANA.
La  Parfaite  Union,
Cayenne.
OCEANICA.
L'Oceanie  Franchise,
He  de  Taiti,  Papeiti.

--- Sayfa 546 ---
534
WORLD'S   MASONIC   REGISTER.
GERMANY.
GRAND  LODGE  OP  THREE  GLOBES,  BERLIN.
Zum  Bunde  der  Gr.  Nat.  Mutter  Loge  der  Freimaurer  in  den  Preussischen
Staaten,  "  ztr  den  Drei  Weltkugeln,"  in  Berlin.
LODGE.
Location.
Bestaendigkeit  und  Eintracht,
Aachen.
Julius  zu  den  drei  empfindsamen  Herzen,
Anclam.
Friedrich  Wilhelm  zur  Hoffnung,
Arnswalde.
Georg  zur  wachsenden  Palme,
Arolsen.
Louisa  zum  troestenden  Engel,
Angersburg.
Westphalia  zur  Eintracht,
Arnsberg.
Goldene  Mauer,
Bautzen.
Eintracht,
Berlin.
Plammender  Stern,
Berlin.
Drei  Seraphim,
Berlin.
Verschwiegenheit,
Berlin.
Alexius  zur  Bestandigkeit,
Bernburg.
Armin  zur  deutschen  Treue,
Bielefeld.
Drei  Rosenknospen,
Bochem.
Friedrich  zur  Tugend,
Brandenburg  a.  d. H.
Bruno  zum  Doppelkreuz,
Braunsberg  i.  Pr.
Friedrich  zum  goldenen  Zepter,
Breslau.
Friedrich  zur  aufgehenden  Sonne,
Brieg.
Janus,
Bromberg.
Adamas  zur  heiligen  Burg,
Burg.
Zum  heiligen  Johannes,
Oamin.
Feste  Burg  an  der  Saale,
Calbe  a.  d.  S.
Friedrich  zur  Vaterlandsliebe,
Coblenz.
Wilhelm  zur  Mannerkraft,
Colberg.
Minerva  zum  vaterlandischen  Verein  und  Rhenana zur
Humanitat,
Coin.
Friedrich  zur  wahren  Freundschaft,
Conitz.
Maria  zum  goldenen  Schwert,
Coslin.
Friedrich  Wilhelm  zum  goldenen  Zepter,
Custrin.
Eugenia  zum  gekronten  Lowen,
Dantzig.
Rose  am  Teutoburger  Walde,
Detmold.
Deutsche  Burg,
Duisberg.
Drei  Verbundete,
Dusseldorf.
Zur  Alten  Linde,
Dortmund.
Hermann  zum  Lande  der  Berge,
Elberfeld.

--- Sayfa 547 ---
LODQE.
Location.
Constantia  zur  gekronten  Eintracht,
Elbing.
Carl  zu  den  drei  Adlern,
Erfurt.
Aufrichtiges  Herz,
Frankfort  a.  d.  0.
Friedrich  zur  Vaterlandstreue,
Gardelegen.
Vorwarts,
Gladbach.
Drei  Triangel,
Glatz.
Biedere  Vereinigung,
Glogau.
Bekranzter  Oubus,
Gnesen.
Ernst  zum  Compass,
Gotha.
Franz  zum  treuen  Herzen,
Greifenhagen.
Drei  Saulen  am  Weinberge,
Guben.
Phcebus  Apollo,
Gustrow.
Drei  Hammer,
Halberstadt.
Drei  Degen,
Halle.
Helles  Licht,
Hamm.
Freundschaft  u.  Wohlthaetigkeit,
Havelberg.
Tempel  der  Freundschaft,
Heiligenstadt.
Julia  Carolina  zu  den  Drei  Helmen,
Helmstadt.
Wilhelm  z.  eisernen  Kreuz,
Herrnstadt  in  Schl.
Heisse  Quelle,
Hirschberg.
Preussischer  Adler,
Insterburg.
Deutsche  Redlichkeit,
Iserlohn.
Wahrheit  und    Einigkeit   zu   den  sieben vereinigten
Brudern,
Julich.
Drei  Kronen,
Konigsberg.
Vereinigte  Freunde  an  der  Nahe,
Kreuznach.
Tempel  der  Pflichttreue,
Krotoszyn.
St.  Johannes  zum  schwarzen  Adler,
Landsberg  a.  d.  "W.
Pythagoras  zu  den  drei  Hohen,
Liegnitz.
Zum  lebendigen  Kreuz,
Lippstadt.
Leopard,
Lubben.
Stern  der  Hoffnung,
Luckenwalde.
Blucher  von  Wahlstadt,
Luxemburg.
Zur  goldenen  Harfe,
Marienwerder.
Ferdinand  zur  Gluckseligkeit,
Magdeburg.
Victoria  zu  den  drei  gekronten  Thurmen,
Marienburg.
Memphis,
Memel.
Goldenes  Kreuz,
Merseburg.
Louise  zur  Unsterblichkeit,
Meseritz.
Wittekind,
Minden.
Broich  zur  verkl.  Louise,
Muhlheim  a.  d.  Ruhr.
Hermann  zur  deutschen  Treue,
Muhlhausen  i.  Pr.
Drei  Balken  des  neuen  Tempels,
Munster.
Drei  Hammer,
Naumbnrg  a.  d.  S.
Feste  Burg,
Neidenburg  a.  d.  N.
Sechs  Lilien,
Neisse.

--- Sayfa 548 ---
536
world's  masonic  register.
Location.
Ferdinand  zum  rothen  Adler,
Fr.  Wilhelm  zu  den  3  Hammern,
Wilhelm  zur  gekronten  Saule,
Psyche,
Hellflammendes  Schwert,
Palme,
Perle  am  Berge,
Tempel  der  Eintracht,
Teutonia  zur  Weisheit,
Wahrheit,
Drei  Thore  des  Tempels,
Treue  u.  Staerke,
Friedrich  Wilhelm  zur  Gerechtigkeit,
Johannes  zum  Wohl  der  Menscheit,
Einigkeit,
Borussia,
Drei  eiserne  Berge,
Bundeskette,
Drei  Rosen  im  Walde.
Julius  zur  Eintracht,
Urania  z.  aufgehenden  Sonne,
Drei  Zirkel,
Morgenrothe  des  hoheren  Lichts,
Luise  z.  aufrichtigen  Herzen,
Friedrich  Wilhelm  zu  den  drei  Kranzen,
Zum  schuetzenden  Thor,
Drei  weisse  Pelsen,
Goldenes  Schwert,
Wilhelm  zu  den  drei  Helmen,
Astraa,
Friedrich  zur  Best'andigkeit,
Stern  St.  Johannis,
Neuruppin.
Neustadt  Eberswalde.
Oels.
Oppeln.
Paderborn.
Pasewalk.
Perleberg.
Posen.
Potsdam.
Prenzlan.
Eastenburg.
Bathenow.
Batibor.
Salzwedel.
Schlawe  a.  d.  Ostsee.
Schneidemuhl.
Siegen.
Soest.
Sorau.
Stargard  i.  Pommern.
Stargard  i.  w.  Pr.
Stettin.
Stolp.
Tilsit.
Torgau.
Warrendorf.
Weissenfels.
Wesel.
Wetzlar.
Wolmirstadt.
Zerbst.
Zielenzig.
GBAND  LODGE  OF  GERMANY,  BERLIN— SWEDISH  SYSTEM.
Zum  Bunde  deb  Ge.  Landbs  Looe  der  Freimaukeb  ton  "  Deutschland,"  in
Beelin.
Drei  Kleeblatter,  Ascherslebe.
Euthanasia  zur  Unsterblichkeit,  Beeskow.
Best'andigkeit,  Berlin.
Goldenes  Scbiff,  Berlin.
Drei  goldene  Schlussel,  Berlin.
Goldener  Pflug,  Berlin.
Widder,  Berlin.
Pegase,  Berlin.
Pilgrim,  Berlin.

--- Sayfa 549 ---
GERMANY.
537
Lodge.
Location.
Friedr.  Wilhelm  zur  Morgenroethe,
Vesta  zu  den  drei  Thurmen,
Friedrich  Wilhelm  z.  eisernen  Kreuz,
Oelzweig,
Prov.  Loge  von  Schlesien,
Drei  Todtengerippe,  Saule  und  Glocke,
Goldene  Kette,
Urania  zur  Eintracht,
Hoffnung,
Brunnen  in  der  Wuste,
Bos,
Victor  zum  goldenen  Hammer,
Friedr.  Wilhelm  zur  Liebe  und  Treue,
Auf  bluhender  Baum,
Zur  wahren  Treue,
Victoria  zur  Liebe  u.  Treue,
Carl  zu  den  drei  Greifen,
Goldene  Leyer,
Victoria  zur  Morgenroethe,
Prov.  Loge  von  Niedersachsen,
Drei  Eosen,
Goldene  Kugel.
Pelikan,
Rother  Adler,
Unverbruchliche  Einigkeit,
Boanerges  zur  Bruderliebe,
Tempel  der  Freundschaft  u.  Wohlthatigkeit,
St.  Martin  zu  den  drei  goldenen  Aehren,
Prov.  Loge  von  Prenssen,
Todtenkopf  und  Phonix,
Tempel  des  Johannes,
Wegweiser,
Fullhorn,
Weisse  Taube,
Wahrheit  und  Tugend,
Hedwig  zum  Licht,
Georg  zur  wahren  Treue,
Gekronte  Unschuld,
Friederica  Ludovica  zur  Treue,
Minerva,
Rugia  zur  Hoffnung,
Goldene  Wage,
Prov.  Loge  von  Meklenburg,
Tempel  der  Warheit,
Prometheus  und  Irene  z.  d.  drei  Sternen,
Drei  Felsen,
Berlin.
Boitzenburg.
Bonn.
Bremen.
Breslau.
Breslau.
Bunslau.
Butzow.
Oleve.
Cottbus.
Orefeld.
Delitsch.
Demmin.
Eisleben.
Emden.
Frankenstein.
Greifswald.
Gumbinnen.
Hagen.
Hamburg.
Hamburg.
Hamburg.
Hamburg.
Hamburg.
Hamburg.
Hamburg.
Havelberg.
Jauer.
Konigsberg  i.  Pr.
Konigsberg  i.  Pr.
Konigsberg  i.  d.  N.  M.
Lowenberg.
Lubeck.
Neisse.
Neusalz.
Neu-Stettin.
Neu-Strelitz.
Nordhausen.
Parchim.
Potsdam.
Putbus.
Quedlingburg.
Bostock.
Bostock.
Bostock.
Schmiedeberg.

--- Sayfa 550 ---
538
world's  masonic  register.
Tem  pel  der  Tugend,  Schwedt.
Herkules,  Schweidnitz.
Westphalischer  Lowe,  Schwelm.
Harpokrates  zur  Morgenrothe,  Schwerin.
Prinz  von  Preussen  zu  den  drei  Schwertern,  Solingen.
Victor  zum  goldenen  Hammer,  Spandan.
Grosser  Christoph,  Stade.
Goldene  Krone,  Stendal.
Drei  goldene  Anker  zur  Liebe  und  Treue,  Stettin.
Gastav  Adolph  zu  den  drei  Strahlen,  Stralsund.
Sichere  Hafen,  Swinemunde.
Silberfels,  Tarnowitz.
Bienenkorb,  Thorn.
Irene,  Tilsit.
Eintracht,  Treptow  a.  d.  R.
Gluck  auf  znr  Brudertreue,  Waldenburg  i.  S.
Friedrich  Franz  zur  Wahrheit,  Waren.
Heiliger  Joseph,  Wien.
Athanasia  zu  den  drei  Lowen,  Wismar.
Einigkeit,  Wrietzen.
Victoria  a.  begluckenden  Liebe,  Zeitz.
GRAND  LODGE  OF  PRUSSIA,  ROYAL  YORK  TO  THE  FRIENDSHIP,
BERLIN.
Zum  Bunde  d.  Gr.  Loqe  v.  Preussen,  "Royal-York  z.  Freundschaft,"  in
Berlin.
Friedr.  Wilh.  zur  Gekronten  Gerechtigkeit,
Siegende  Wahrheit,
Urania  zur  Unsterblichkeit,
Pythagoras  zum  Flammenden  Stern,
Prov.  Gross  Loge  von  Schlesien,
Horns,
Luise  z.  gekroenten  Schoenheit,
Siegende  Wahrheit,
Einigkeit,
Pax  Inimica  Malis,
Zur  Siegenden  Wahrheit,
Bundestreue,
Treue  an  der  Katzbach,
Gekronte  Schlange,
Victoria  zu  den  drei  Gekronten  Thurmen,
Erwin  fur  Licht  und  Recht,
Heiliges  Feuer,
Constantia  der  Vereinigten  Oriente,
Inniger  Verein  am  Riesengebirge,
Berlin.
Berlin.
Berlin.
Berlin.
Breslau.
Breslau.
Charlottenbnrg.
Cosel.
Danzig.
Emmerich.
Gleiwitz.
Goldap.
Goldberg.
Gorlitz.
Graudenz.
Grunberg.
Hettstadt.
Kyritz  und  Wittstock.
Landeshut  i.  S.

--- Sayfa 551 ---
GERMANY.  539
LOBSE.  LOOATIOW.
Isis,  Lauban.
Harpokrates,  Magdeburg.
Drei  grosse  Lichter,  Naumburg.
Standhaftigkeit,  Potsdam.
Aurora  zur  ehrenen  Kette,  Reichenbach.
Starke  uud  Schonheit,  Saarbrucben.
Vereinigte  Preunde,  Saarlouis.
Brudertreue,  Sangerhausen.
Wahre  Eintracht,  Schweidnitz.
Verein  der  Menschenfreunde,  Trier.
Treuer  Verein,  Wittenberg.
Zirkel  der  Eintracht,  Weissenfels.
Elisabeth  z.  festen  Burg,  Zeitz.
GRAND  LODGE  OF  HAMBURG.
ZuM  BUNDE  DEE  Ge.  LoGE  VON  HAMBURG.
Pflichttreue,  Birkenfeld.
Carl  zur  gekronten  Saule,  Braunschweig.
Karl  z.  Wartburg,  Eisenach.
Frankfurter  Adler,  Frankfort  a.  M.
Absalom,  Hamburg.
St.  Georg,  Hamburg.
Emanuel,  Hamburg.
Ferdinande  Caroline,  Hamburg.
Ferdinand  zum  Felsen,  Hamburg.
Carl  zum  Brunnen  des  Heils,  Heilbronn.
Weltkugel,  Lubeck.
Friedensbund,  Neubrandenburg,
Goldener  Hirsch,  Oldenburg.
Prov.  Loge  v.  Mecklenburg  Schwer.  u.  Strelitz,  Rostock.
Drei  Sterne,  Rostock.
Gunther  z.  stehenden  Loewen,  Rudolstadt,
Drei  Cedern,  Stuttgart.
Carl  zu  den  drei  Ulmen,  Ulm.
Wilhelm  z.  silbernen  Kreuz,  Varel.
Amalia,  "Weimar.
Vaterlandsliebe,  Wismar.
Wilhelm  zu  den  drei  Saulen,  Wolfenbuttel.
GRAND  MOTHER  LODGE  OF  THE  EKLEKTA  UNION  OF  FREE-
MASONS AT  FRANKFORT  ON  THE  MAIN.
Zum  Bunde  deb  "  Ge.  Mutter-Loge  des  eklektischen  F.  M.-bundes,"  in
Frankfurt  am  Main.
Carl  zum  neuen  Licht,  Alzey.
Ernst  zur  Wahrheit,  Freundschaft  u.  Recht,  Coburg.
Libanon  zu  den  drei  Cedern,  Erlangen.
35

--- Sayfa 552 ---
540
world's  masonic  register.
Binigkeit,
Sokrates  zur  Standhaftigkeit,
Carl  zum  Aufgehenden  Licht,
Ludwig  zur  Treue,
Brudertreue  an  der  Elbe,
Brnderkette,
Drei  Pfeile,
Joseph  zur  Einigkeit,
Carl  und  Charlotte  zur  Treue,
Plato  z.  bestandigen  Einigkeit,
Wiedererbauter  Tempel  der  Bruderliebe,
Frankfurt  a.  M.
Frankfurt  a.  M.
Frankfurt  a.  M.
Giessen.
Hamburg.
Hamburg.
Nurnberg.
Nurnberg.
Offenbach.
"Wiesbaden.
"Worms.
GRAND  LODGE  OF  THE  KINGDOM  OF  HANOVER.
Zum  Bunde  der  "  Gk.  Loge  des  Koniqreichs  Hannover,"  in  Hannover.
Luise  Angusta,
Eintracht  und  Standhaftigkeit,
Hell  Leuchtender  Stern,
Georg  zur  gekroenten  Saule.
Georg  zu  den  drei  Saulen,
Ostfriesische  Union,
Augusta  zum  goldenen  Zirkel,
Hercynia  zum  flammenden  Stern,
Friedrich  zum  weissen  Pferde,
Schwarzei  Bar,
Ceder,
Ernst  August  zum  goldenen  Anker,
Pforte  zum  Tempel  des  Lichts,
Stiller  Tempel,
St.  Alban  z.  echten  Feuer,
Georg  z.  wahren  Brudertreue,
Selene  zu  den  drei  Thurmen,
Pythagoras  zu  den  drei  Stromen,
Georg  zum  silbemen  Einhorn,
Goldenes  Rad,
Tempel  der  Eintracht,
Adolphus  z.  gekronten  Tugend,
Friederike  zur  Unsterblichkeit,
Marie  zum  RauteDkranz,
Alfeld.
Cassel.
Celle.
Clausthal  u.  Zellerfeld.
Einbeck.
Emden.
Gottingen.
Goslar.
Hanover.
Hanover.
Hanover.
Harburg.
Hildesheim.
Hildesheim.
Hoya.
Leer.
Luneburg.
Munden.
Nienburg  a.  d.  W.
Osnabruck.
Osterode.
Stade.
Stade.
Verden.
GRAND  LODGE  OF  SAXONY,  IN  DRESDEN.
Zum  Bunde  der  "  Gr.  Landes-Looe  von  Sachsen,"  in  Dresden.
Treues  Bruderherz,
Harmonie,
Goldener  Apfel,
Annaberg.
Chemnitz.
Dresden.

--- Sayfa 553 ---
Lodge.
Oil
Location.
Drei  Schwerte  u.  Astraa  zur  grunenden  Raute,
Dresden.
Drei  Berge,
Freiberg.
Verschwisterung  der  Menscheit,
Glauchau.
Albrecht  zur  Eintracht,
Grimma.
Apollo,
Leipzig.
Charlotte  zu  den  drei  Nelken,
Meiningen.
Akazie,
Meissen.
Pyramide,
Plauen.
Archimedes  zum  Sachsischen  Bunde,
Schneeberg
Friedrich  August  zum  Treuen  Bunde,
Wurzen.
Friedrich  August  zu  den  drei  Zirkeln,
Zittau.
GRAND  LODGE  OF  BAVARIA  TO  THE  SUN  IN  BAYREUTH.
Zum  Bunde  der  "Gr.  Mutter-Loge  der  P.  M.  zur  Sonne,"  in  Bayreoth.
Alexander  z.  d.  3  Sternen,
Eleusis  zur  Verschwiegenheit,
Leopold  zur  Treue,
Freimuthigkeit  am  Rhein,
Die  Freunde  z.  edlen  Aussicht,
"Wahrheit  nnd  Freundschaft,
Karl  z.  geprueften  Treue,
Rupprecht  z.  d.  3  Rosen,
Morgenstern,
Goldene  "Wage,
Karl  z.  Treue,
Johannes  zum  Wiedererbauten  Tempel,
Carl  zur  Eintracht,
Wilhelm  zur  aufgehenden  Sonne,
Anspach.
Bayreuth.
Carlsruhe.
Frankenthal.
Freiburg  im  B.
Furth.
Heidelberg.
Heidelberg.
Hot
Hof.
Pappenheim.
Ludwigsburg.
Mannheim.
Stuttgart.
GRAND  LODGE  (CONCORDIA)   DARMSTADT,  HESSIA.
Zum  Bunde  der  "  Gr.  Loge  des  F.  M.  Bundes  zur  Eintracht,"  in  Darmstadt.
Johannes  der  Evangelist  zur  Eintracht,
Carl  zum  Lindenburg,
Freunde  zur  Eintracht,
Darmstadt.
Frankfort  a.  M.
Mainz.
ISOLATED  LODGES  OF  GERMANY.
Isolirten  Logen  in  Deutschland.
Archimedes  zu  den  drei  Reissbrettern,
Archimedes  zum  ewigen  Bunde,
Silberne  Schlussel,
Carl  zum  Rautenkranz,
Altenburg.
Gera.
Ievern.
Hildburghausen.

--- Sayfa 554 ---
542
world's  masonic  register.
Minerva  zu  den  drei  Palmen,
Balduin  zur  Linde,
Carl  zu  den  drei  Schlusseln,
Leipzig.
Leipzig.
Regensburg.
GRAND  LODGE  OF  ENGLAND.
ZtJM  BuNDE  D.  Ge.  LOGE  V.  ENGLAND,  IN  LONDON.
Zur  aufgehenden  Morgenrothe,  No.  444,  Frankfurt  a.  M.
SWITZERLAND.
GRAND  LODGE   OF  SWITZERLAND,  ALPINA,  IN  BASLE
The  present  seat  of  this  Grand  Lodge  is  at  Lausanne,  Canton  Waadt.
Grand  Orient  de  Suisse  Alpine  a  Bale.
La  Chretienne  des  Alpes,
Aigle.
La  Constance,
Aubonne.
Brudertreue,
Aarau.
Freundschaft  und  Bestandigkeit,
Bale.
Hoffnung,
Berne.
La  Reunion,
Bex.
Freundschaft,
Chaux  de  fonds.
Concordia  cum  Libertate,
Chur.
La  Regeneree,
Froiburg.
L'Union  des  Coeurs,
Geneve.
La  Fidelity
Geneve.
La  Prudence,
Geneve.
L'Amitie',
Geneve.
Les  vrais  Freres  Unis,
Locle.
Esperance  et  Cordiality,
Lausanne.
Zur  Bundestreue,
Liestal.
Les  Amis,
Monges.
Egalite,
Motiers  Travers.
Frederic  Guillaume  la  bonne  Harmonie,
Neufchatel.
La  vraie  Union,
Nyon.
La  nouvelle  Etoile,
Orbe.
La  vraie  Fraternity,
Rolle.
La  Constance,
Vevay.
Akazia,
Winterthur.
Modestia  cum  Libertate,
Zurich.

--- Sayfa 555 ---
DENMARK — SWEDEN   AND   NORWAY.
543
UNDER  THE  JURISDICTION  OF  THE  "  GRAND  ORIENT  OP
FRANCE."
Lodge.  Location.
Etoile  du  Leman,
Fraternity
Parfaite  Harmonie,
Preres  Reunis,
Geneve.
Geneve.
Muhlhausen.
Strasbourg.
DENMARK.
GRAND  LODGE  OF  DENMARK,  IN  COPENHAGEN.
Cimbria,
Carl  zum  Pelsen,
Zorobabel  z.  Nordstern,
Friedrich  z.  gekroenten  Hoffnung,
Christian  zur  Palme,
Kosmos,
Maria  z.  d.  3  Herzen,
Salomo  z.  gekroenten  Loewen,
Heiliges  Kreuz,
Zur  Einigkeit,
Zur  Bruderliebe,
Aalberg  i.  J.
Altona.
Copenhagen.
Copenhagen.
Copenhagen.
Helsingor.
Odensee.
Schleswig.
St.  Croix,  "West  Indies.
St.  Thomas,  Westlndies.
Tranquebar.
SWEDEN  AND  NORWAY
GRAND  LODGE  OF  SWEDEN,  IN  STOCKHOLM.
Elisabeth,
Gustav,
St.  Olans  z.  weissen  Leoparden,
Provinzial-Loge,
Die  kubischen  Steine,
St.  Christoph,
Provinzial-Loge,
Salomo  z.  d.  3  Schlusseln,
Die  drei  vereinigten  Kronen,
Loge  von  Sudermannland,
Canton.
Carlskrona.
Christiana.
Chris  tianstadt.
Christianstadt.
Christianstadt.
Gothenburg.
Gothenburg.
Gothenburg.
Gustavia,  St.  Bartholo-
mie,  West  Indies.

--- Sayfa 556 ---
544  world's  masonic  register.
Oscar,  Helmstadt.
Phcenix,  Helsingfors.
St.  Augustin,  Helsingfors.
Die  mittlere  Saule,  Ionkoping.
Provinzial-Loge,  Linkoping.
St.  Jacob,  Linkoping.
Erste  nordische  St.  Johannes  Loge,  Stockholm.
St.  Ehrich,  Stockholm.
Oscar  z.  flammenden  Stern,  Dramenen.
SUPREME  CONSEIL  MACONNIQUE  CHEF  DE  L'ORDRE
DANS  LE  GRAND-DUCHE  DE  LUXEMBOURG.
L'Esperance,  Echternach.
Des  Enfants  de  la  Concorde  fortifiee,  Luxembourg.
BELGIUM.
LODGES  UNDER  THE  "  SUPREME  CONSEIL  DE  BELGIQUE,"
Recognized  by  the  European  Grand  Lodges.
Lo™*-  Location.
La  Perseverance,  Antwerp.
Les  Amis  Philanthropes,  Brussels.
La  Fidelity  Ghent.
L'Industrie,  Ladelinsart.
La  Constance,  Louvrain.
La  Regeneration,  Mechlin.
La  Parfaite  Union,  Mons.
Les  Vrais  Amis  de  1'Union,  Brussels.
Les  Amis  du  Progres,  Brussels.
L'Avenir,  Charleroi.
Les  Preres  Reunis,  Tournay.
L'Esperance,  Nieuport.
Les  Amis  du  Conseree,  Antwerp.
Les  Eleves  du  Themis,  Antwerp!
Les  Amis  des  Parfaite  Intelligence,  Huy.
La  Parfaite  Intelligence  et  L'Etoile  Reunis,  Luttich,
Les  Philadelphes,  Verviers.

--- Sayfa 557 ---
HOLLAND.
545
UNDER  GRAND  LODGE  OP  HOLLAND.
Lodge.  Location.
Septentriura,
Felicite  Bienfaisante,
Les  Vrais  Amis,
L'Amenit6,
L'Amitie  sans  fin,
Gent.
Gent.
Gent.
St.  Nicoloug.
Sluis.
HOLLAND.
GR.  NAT.  MOEDER
»S
Lome.
Noordstaar,
Concordia  Vincit  Animos,
La  Paix,
La  Charite,
La  Bien-Aimee,
Willem  Prederik,
Geldersche  Broederschap,
L'Inseparable,
Vrye  Geweten,
L'Auror,
Silentium,
Le  Prejug6  Vaincu,
La  Flamboyante,
Orde  en  Vlyt,
Ware  Broedertronw,
L'Union  Provinciale,
L'Union  Maconnique,
Vicit  vim  Virtus,
Willem  Frederik  Karel,
Le  Profond  Silence,
Vriesche  Trouw,
La  Vertu,
La  Perseverance,
La  Philantrope,
La  Campagnie  Durable,
St.  Lodewyk,
Eendragt,
Frederic  Royal,
Drie  Kolommen,
-LOGE  DER  NEDERLANDEN  IN
GRAVENHAGE.
Location.
Alkmaar.
Amsterdam.
Amsterdam.
Amsterdam.
Amsterdam.
Amsterdam.
Arnhem.
Bergen  op  Zoom.
Breda.
Briel.
Delft.
Deventer.
Dortrecht.
Gorinchem.
Gouda.
Groningen.
Groningen.
Haarlem.
Helder.
Kampen.
Leeuwarden.
Leiden.
Maastricht.
Middelburg.
Middelburg.
Nymegen.
Rotterdam.
Rotterdam.
Rotterdam.

--- Sayfa 558 ---
546
world's  masonic  register.
Location.
Ryzende  Zon,
L'Union  Royale,
Eendragt  Maak  Magt,
L'Union  Frederic,
Edelraoedigheid,
Concordia  res  Parvae  Crescunt,
Zeeuwsehe  Harmonie,
Ultrajectina,
La  Simplicity,
Standvastigheid  en  Trouw,
L'Astre  de  l'Orient,
Eensgezindheid,
Anna  Paulowna,
Ster  in  het  Oosten,
Fides  Mutua,
Schiedam.
's  Gravenhage.
's  Gravenhage.
's  Gravenhage.
's  Hertogenbosch.
Sneek.
Tholen
Utrecht.
Venlo.
Vianen.
Vlissingen.
Willemstadt.
Zaandam.
Zierikzee.
Zwolle.
DUTCH  COLONIES.
Ster  in  het  Oosten,
Salomon,
Standvastigheid,
Coelum  non  Mutat  Gesus,
Goede  Hoop,
Goede  Trouw,
Getronwheid,
Vereeniging,
L'Union,
Vergenoegen,
St.  Jean  de  la  Reunion,
Concordia,
The  Reunion,
Unie,  No.  3,
Charity,
Lang  Gewenschte,
Standvastigheid,
Opregtheid,
Louisa  Augusta,
La  Constante  et  Fidele,
Vriendschap,
St.  Jean  de  la  Concorde,
La  Zelee,
L'Union,
La  Solitaire,
Cura  et  Vigilantia,
Concordia,
La  Reunion  Neufchatelloise,
Batavia,  E.  I.
Bengalen,  E.  I.
Bengalen,  E.  I.
Berbice,  S.  A.
Kaap  of  Goede  Hoop.
Kaap  of  Goede  Hoop.
Colombo,  C.
Colomba,  C.
Curacoa,  W.  I.
Curaqoa,  W.  I.
Demarara,  S.  A.
St.  Eustatius,  W.  L
St.  Eustatius,  W.  I.
St.  Martin,  W.  I.
St.  Martin,  W.  J.
Negapatnam,  E.  I.
Paramaribo,  S.  A.
Punto  Gale,  C.
Purmerend,  E.  I.
Samarang.
Sourabaja,  E.  I.
Souratte,  E.  I.
Surinam,  E.  I.
Surinam,  E.  I.
Surinam,  E.  I.
Surinam,  E.  I.
Surinam,  E.  I.
Veld  Loge  in  Indie.

--- Sayfa 559 ---
SPAIN — CANADA.  547
SPAIN.
GRAND  LODGE  OF  SPAIN,  MADRID.
Amigos  de  la  Naturaleza  y  Humanidad,  Gigon,  Province  Asturia,  under  the
"  Grand  Orient  of  France."  There  are  also  Lodges  at  Barcelona  and  Gracia,
correct  information  of  which  we  have  not  yet  been  able  to  receive,  but  in  a
future  edition  hope  to  give  a  full  and  complete  list.
CANADA.
UNDER  GRAND  LODGE OP  ENGLAND.
No.        Lodge.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
17    Albion,
Quebec.
2d  Friday.
214*  St.  John's,
Quebec.
2d  Wednesday.
514*  St.  Paul's,
Montreal.
516     St.  Andrew's,
St.  Andrews.
720    Goderich  Union,
Goderich.
1st  Saturday.
796    St.  John's,
Carleton  Place.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
835    Dalhousie,
Ottawa.
1st  Tuesday.
931     Alma,
Montreal.
1st  Thursday.     ,
UNDER  GRAND  LODGE  OP  IRELAND.
159    Hawkesbury.
UNDER  GRAND  LODGE  OF  SCOTLAND.
348    Elgin,  Montreal.
35.6    St.  Andrew's,  Quebec.

--- Sayfa 560 ---
548
WORLD'S   MASONIC   REGISTER.
NEW  BRUNSWICK.
Lodges  with  the  *  prefixed  have Chapters attached.
No.
Reg.
Lodge.
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
670*  E.  E. Albion,
St.  John.
1st  Friday.
632
1 1
St.  John's,
St.  John.
1st  Tuesday.
780
a
Portland  Union,
St.  John.
1st  Thursday.
767
a
Carleton  Union,
Carleton,  St. John.
1st  Thursday.
770
tt
Midian,
Kingston.
2d  Tuesday.
705
it
Sussex,
Dorchester.
Thurs.  on  or  af.  f.  m,
759*
it
St.  Mark's,
St.  Andrew.
1st  Wednesday.
764
a
Solomon's,
Fredericton.
Tuesday  after  f.  m.
811
tt
Woodstock,
Woodstock,  Carleton  co.
1st  Wednesday.
866
a
Union,
St.  Stephen.
1st  Thursday.
912
tt
St.  George's,
St.  George.
1st  Tuesday.
918
tt
Corinthian,
Norton,  King's  co.
Wed.  on  or  af.  f.  m.
927
tt
Keith,
Moncton.
1st  Th.  on  or  af.  f.  m.
932
n
Queen's,
Queen's  co.
1st  Thursday.
962
ti
Alley,
Upper  Mills, St. Stephen.
1st  Thursday.
966
tt
Howard,
Hillsboro'.
1003
it
Northumberland, New  Castle.
2d  Tuesday.
1077
it
Miramichi,
Chatham.
3d  Tuesday.
1110
a
Salisbury,
Salisbury.
301*
I.  E. Hibernia,
St.  John.
2d  Tuesday.
318*
U
Hibernia,
St.  Andrew.
327*
it
Sussex,
St.  Stephen.
Wed.  on  or  af.  f.  m.
* S.  E. St.  Andrew's,
Richibucto.
364*
tt
St.  Andrew's,
Fredericton.
NOYA   SCOTIA.
Lodges  with  the *  prefixed  have Chapters attached.
No.        Reg.
Lodge.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
137*  E.  E. St.  Andrew's,
Halifax.
1st  Tuesday.
187
St.  John's,
Halifax.
1st  Monday.
330    I.  E. McGowan,
Amherst.
Thurs.  on  or  af.  f.  m,
331
Shamrock,
Halifax.
3d  Monday.
345    S.  E. Acadia,
Dartmouth.
352        "
Burns,
Halifax.
1st  Wednesday.
361        "
Atholl,
Halifax.
2d  Monday.

--- Sayfa 561 ---
SOUTH  AMERICA.
54S
No.
Res.
Louse.
Location.
Time  op  Meeting.
365
S.  R. Keith,
Halifax.
2d  Wednesday.
557
E.  R. Union,
Halifax.
558
a
Virgin,
Halifax.
559
a
Temple,
Grigsborough.
560
if
Hiram,
Shelburn.
561
t(
St.  George's,
Lower  Horton.
563
ft
Sussex,
Newport.
564
tt
Royal  Standard,
Halifax.
2d  Tuesday.
565
(t
Union,
Lunenberg.
566
it
Fort  Edward,
Windsor.
567
ft
Moira,
Rawdon.
568
tt
Colchester,
Rawdon.
569
tc
Cumberland  Harmony, ,  Amherst.
572
«<
St.  Mary's,
Digby.
573
tt
Rising  Sun,
Londonderry.
692
tt
Albion,
New  Glasgow.
1st  Tuesday.
704
t(
Royal  Sussex,
Halifax.
1st  Thursday.
732
tt
St.  Andrew's,
Sydney,  Cape  Breton.
1st  Tuesday.
821
tt
Zetland,
Liverpool.
4th  Thursday.
826
a
New  Caledonia,
Pictou.
2d  Tuesday.
868
»
Hiram  of  Yarmouth,
Yarmouth.
1st  Monday.
888
tt
Acadia,
Pugwash.
1st  Monday.
911
tt
Keith,
Hillsburgh.
1st  Monday.
982
tt
Mariners',
Granville.
1st  Tuesday.
994
tt
Union,
Halifax.
3d  Monday.
S.  R. Royal  Albert,
Sydney,  Cape  Breton.
SOUTH   AMERICA.
VENEZUELA.
No.
Lodge.
Location.
1 Protectora  de  los  Virtudes,
Barcelona.
2 Perfecta  Armonia,
Cumana.
3 Unanimidad,
Laguayra.
11
Liberty,
Puerto  Oabello.
15
Kegeneradores,
Maracaibo.
19
Victoria,
Ouriepe.
26
Aurora  de  Petare,
Petare.
36
Justitia,
Maracai.
37
Esperanza,
Caracas.
38
Victoria,
Victoria.
39
Filanwopia,
Guarenas.
40
Prudencia,
Caracas.
41 Amistad,
Montalvan.

--- Sayfa 562 ---
550
world's  masonic  register.
No.              Lodge.
Location.
42     Constancia,
San  L.  de  Cura.
43    Porvenir,
Caracas.
50    La  Union  Britina,
Puerto  Cabello.
NEW  GRANADA.
Grand  Orient,
Carthagena.
1     Hospitalidad  Granadina,
Carthagena.
2     Beneficencia,
Carthagena.
3    Humanidad  GranadiDa,
Santa  Martha.
4    Pilantropia  Biohachera,
Biohacha.
5     Fres  Victudes  Feologales,
Carthagena.
6     Caridad  Universal,
Santa  Martha.
7    La  Mas  Solida  Victud,
Jamaica.
8     La  Union  i  Concordia,
Losica.
9    Union,
Carthagena.
10    Perfecta  Ygneldad,
Cnrazao.
1 1     Estrella  del  Pequendama,
Bogota.
12     Union  Fraternal,
Barranquilla.
13     Union  i  Concordia,
Chagres.
14    Hospitalidad  del  Magdalena,
Honda.
15     Francos  Grauadinos,
Panama.
16    Filantropia  Bogotana,
Bogota.
17     Luz  del  Polina,
Ambalema.
18     Union  Mompoxina,
Mompox.
MONTEVIDEO.
Grand  Lodge,
Uragnay.-
Luz  Oriental,
Uraguay.
Amigos  de  la  Perseverancia,
Uraguay.
Union  Besplandeciente  Trasallantica,
Uraguay.
Misterio  y  Honor,
Uraguay.
Virtud  y  Secreto,
Uraguay.
Hesperia,
Uraguay.
Les  Amis  de  la  Patrie,
Uraguay.
LIMA.
Grand  Orient,
Peru.
Orden  y  Libertad,
Pern.
Concordia  Universal,
Callao.
CHILI.
Grand  Orient,
L'Btoile  du  Pacifiqne,
Valparaiso.
L'Union  Fraternelle,
Valparaiso.

--- Sayfa 563 ---
SOUTH   AMERICA.
551
BUENOS  AYRES.
Lodge.
Location.
Amie  des  Naufrages,
Excelsior,  E.  E.,
Bio  de  la  Plata,
Buenos  Ayres.
LODGES  UNDER  THE  GRAND  ORIENT  OP  PERU.
Paz  y  Perfeota  Union,
Orden  y  Libertad,
Virtudy  Union,
Crnz  Austral,
Filantropia  del  Guayas,
Estrella  del  Norte,
Estrella  del  Sur,
Praternidad  Universal,
Honor  y  Progreso,
Union  Indisoluble,
Oriente  Liqure,
Ley  Natural,
Lima.
Lima.
Lima.
Oallao.
Guayaquil,  Ecuador.
Huaraz.
Concepcion,  Chile.
Oerro  de  Pasco.
Lima.
Piura.
Chivari,  Cerdena.
Quito,  Ecuador.
No.  Lodge.
1  Commercio  e  Artes,
2  Uniao  e  Tranquillidade,
3  Esperanga  da  Nictheroy,
4  Razao,
5  Segredo,
6  Amor  da  Ordem,
7  Seis  de  Marqo,
8  Philantropia  e  Liberdade,
9  Intelligencia,
10  Beneficencia,
11  Firme  Uniao,
12  Educapao  e  Moral,
13  Amizade  Fraternal,
14  Tranquillidade,
15  Imparcialidade,
16  Tolerancia,
17  Caridade,
BRAZIL.
Location.
Bio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.*
Rio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
Kio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
Cuyaba,  Matto  G  rosso.
Bio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
Bio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
Recife,  Pernambuco.
Porto  Alegre,  S.  Pedro  do  Sul.
Porto  Feliz,  S.  Paulo.
Victoria,  Espirito  Santo.
Campos,  Rio  de  Janeiro.
Rio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
Nictheroy,  Eio  de  Janeiro.
Angra  dos  Beis,  Bio  de  Janeiro.
Bio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
Belem,  Para.
Bio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
*  Some  of  the  localities  here  given  are  provinces  and  some  are  cities.  Those  men-
tioned Corte  are  of  the  City  of  Rio  de  Janeiro,  -which  is  not  the  capital  of  the  Prov-
ince of  Rio  de  Janeiro,  but  is,  together  with  the  municipality,  in  the  same  relation
to  the  empire  as  the  District  of  Columbia  is  to  the  United  States.  The  capital  of
the  Province  of  Rio  de  Janeiro  is  Nictheroy,  or  Nitheroy,  situated  on  the  opposite
side  of  the  bay,  a  place  of  no  business  whatever,  containing  about  5000  inhabitants.

--- Sayfa 564 ---
552
WORLD'S   MASONIC  REGISTER.
No.
18  Amigos  Eeunidos,
19  Pratemidade,
20  Uniao  e  Belleza,
21  Garidade  e  Uniao,
22  Harmonia,
23  Eazao  e  Virtude,
24  Perfeita  Uniao,
25  Amizade  Liberal,
26  Triumpho  Brasileiro,
27  Uniao  e  Nictheroy,
28  Beuniao  Beneflcente,
29  Uniao  e  Pratemidade,
30  Begeneracao,
31  Perfeita  Amizade,
32  Luz  Brasileira,
33  Perfeita  Uniao  2d,
34  Humanidade,
35  Prosperidade  Fraternal,
36  Amor  da  Ordem  Eespeitada,
37  Esperanca,
38  Uniao  Paranaguense,
39  Sabedoria  e  Beneficencia,
40  Harmonia  Fraternal,
41  Caridade  e  Firmeza,
42  Triumpho  e  Uniao,
43  Cruzeiro  do  Sol,
44  Fidelidade  e  Virtude,
45  Fidelidade  e  Beneficencia,
46  Virtude,
47  Uniao  Universal,
48  Asylo  da  Prudencia,
49  Industria  e  Caridade,
50  Uniao  Constante,
51  Prosperidade  Maponica,
52  Dous  de  Dezembro,
53  Vinte  e  tres  de  Julho,
54  Concordia  Universal,
55  Harmonia  Eio  Grandens,
56  Vigilancia  da  Lei,
57  Firmeza  e  Uniao,
58  Commercio,
59  Pura  Amizade,
60  Uniao  do  Centro,
61  Instruccao,
62  Caridade  Universal,
63  Agricultura  e  Commerico,
Mangaratiba,  Eio  de  Janeiro.
Itaguahy,  Eio  de  Janeiro.
Paraty,  Eio  de  Janeiro.
Eio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
Areas,  S.  Paulo.
Santo  Antonio  da  Patrulha,  S.  Paulo.
Porto  Alegre,  S.  Pedro  do  Sul.
S.  Joao  do  Principe,  Eio  de  Janeiro.
Angra  dos  Eeis,  Eio  de  Janeiro.
Valenca,  Eio  de  Janeiro.
Eio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
Bananal,  S.  Paulo.
Eio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
Eio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
Eio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
Valenca,  Eio  de  Janeiro.
S.  Salvador,  Bahia.
Iguassu,  Eio  de  Janeiro.
Ubatuba,  S.  Paulo.
Eio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
Paranagua,  S.  Paulo.
Nictheroy,  Eio  de  Janeiro.
Vassouras,  Eio  de  Janeiro.
Eio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
Itaguahy,  Eio  de  Janeiro.
Bananal,  S.  Paulo.
J.  Joao  da  Barra,  Eio  de  Janeiro.
S.  Salvador,  Bahia.
S.  Salvador,  Bahia.
S.  Salvador,  Bahia.
Eio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
Nova  Friburgo,  Eio  de  Janeiro.
Eio  Grande,  S.  Pedro  do  Sul.
Eio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
Eio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
Saquarema,  Eio  de  Janeiro.
Eio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
Eio  Grande,  S.  Pedro  do  Sul.
Eio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
Eio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
Eio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
Eio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
Urubu,  Bahia.
Eio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
S.  Salvador,  Bahia.
Pavuna,  Eio  de  Janeiro.

--- Sayfa 565 ---
SOUTH  AMERICA.
553
Location.
64  Segredo  e  Beneficencio,
65  Firmeza  e  Prosperidade,
66  Cruzeiro  do  Sul  2d,
67  Imperio  da  Razao,
68  Concordia  Fraternal,
69  Triumpho  da  Razao,
70  Protectora  da  Orphandade,
71  Phenix  Dous  de  Dezembro,
72  Abrigo  da  Humanidade,
73  Nova  Estrella,
74  Asylo  da  Yirtude,
75  Fraternidade  Coritibana,
76  Bem-Estar  Mercantil,
77  Philantropia,
78  Humanidade  e  Justicja,
79  Dezoito  de  Julho,
80  Silencio,
81  ConciliaQao  Morreteana,
82  Ypiranga,
83  Estrella  do  Sul,
84  Les  Francs  Hyramites,
85  Sol,
86  Commercio  e  Industria,
87  Regeneragao  Rio-Grandens,
88  Firmeza  e  Humanidade,
89  Acacia  Cachoeirense,
90  Triumpho  da  Virtude,
91  Justica  e  Tolerancia,
92  Philontimia,
93  Luz  Transatlantica,
94  Uniao  Pedrense,
95  Confraternidade  Maqonica,
96  Uniao  Fraternidade  Fidelense,
97  Perseveranca,
98  Uniao  e  Constancia,
99  Concordia,
100  Integridade  Magonica,
Rio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
Rio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
Rio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
Cachoeira,  Bahia.
Rio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
S.  Salvador,  Bahia.
Pelotas,  S.  Pedro  do  Sul.
Rio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
S.  Salvador,  Bahia.
S.  Romao,  Minas.
Capivary,  Rio  de  Janeiro.
Coritiba,  S.  Paulo.
Rio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
Rio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
Alegrete,  S.  Pedro  do  Sul.
Rio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
Rio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
Morretes,  S.  Paulo.
S.  Paulo,  Capital.
Bage,  S.  Pedro  do  Sul.
Rio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
Rio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
Celotas,  S.  Pedro  do  Sul.
Rio  Grande,  S.  Pedro  do  Sul.
Pernambuco,  Capital.
Cachoeira,  Bahia.
Campos,  Rio  de  Janeiro.
Porto  Alegre,  S.  Pedro  do  Sul.
Pernambuco,  Capital.
Jaguarao,  S.  Pedro  do  Sul.
Aldea  da  Pedra,  Campos.
Rio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
S.  Fidelia,  Campos.
Bahia,  Capital.
Bahia,  Capital.
Bahia,  Capital.
Rio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
101  Prosperidade  e  Uniao  Paduense,  S.  Fidelis,  Campos.
S.  Borja,  Rio  Grande  do  Sul.
Rio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
Rio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
Porto  Alegre,  Rio  Grande  do  Sul.
Santa  Anna  do  Livramento,  Rio  Grande
do  Sul.
107  Symbolo  da  Perfeicao  Brasileira,  Campos,  Rio  de  Janeiro.
108  Liberdade  Legal,  Rio  de  Janeiro,  Capital.
102  Cordialidade,
103  Fidelidade,
104  Uniao  Escosseza,
105  Progresso  da  Humanidade
106  Virtude  e  Constancia,

--- Sayfa 566 ---
554
world's  masonic  register.
No.
Lodge.
109  Humanidade  e  Concordia,
110  Guanabara,
111  Fraternidade  Maranhense,
112  Amizade,
113  Concordia  do  Uruguay,
114  Fidelidade  e  Firmeza,
115  Harmonia,
116  Harmonia  Universal,
117  Perfeita  Fraternidade,
118  Philantropia  Eio-Pardense,
119  Razao  e  Virtude,
120  Regeneracao  e  Caridade,
121  S.  Joao  das  Lavras,
122  Uniao  e  Forpa,
123  Uniao  Fraternal,
124  Vinte  e  quatro  de  Thamuz,
125  Tolerancia  e  Amizade,
126  Honra  e  Humanidade,
127  Liga  Firmeza  Sergipana,
128  Philantropia  Itaquiense,
129  Firmeza  e  Humanidade,
130  Igualdade  Beneflcencio,
S.  Luiz,  Maranhao.
Bio  Bonito,  Rio  de  Janeiro.
S.  Luiz,  Maranhao.
Santo  Antonio  da  Patrulha,  S.  Paulo.
Uruguayana,  Rio  Grande  do  Sul.
Porto  Alegre,  Rio  Grande  do  Sul.
Cruz  Alta,  Rio  Grande  do  Sul.
Alegrete,  Rio  Grande  do  Sul.
Cassapava,  Rio  Grande  do  Sul.
Rio  Pardo,  Rio  Grande  do  Sul.
S.  Borja,  Rio  Grande  do  Sul.
S.  Jose  do  Norte,  Rio  Grande  do  Sul.
Lavras,  Rio  Grande  do  Sul.
Rio  Grande  do  Sul,  Capital.
Cachoeira,  Rio  Grande  do  Sul.
S.  Gabriel,  Rio  Grande  do  Sul.
Dores,  Rio  Grande  do  Sul.
Pelotas,  Rio  Grande  do  Sul.
Aracaju,  Sergipe.
Itaqui,  Rio  Grande  do  Sul.
Para,  Capital.
Rio  de  Janeiro,  Corte.
UNDER  GRAND  LODGE  OF  ENGLAND.
No.        Lodge.
616  Orphan,
703  St.  John's,
808  Amistad  Unida,
900  Excelsior,
970  Southern  Cross,
Location.
Rio  de  Janeiro.
Rio  de  Janeiro.
Santa  Martha,  N.  Gr.
Buenos  Ayres.
Pernambuco,  Brazil.
378
UNDER  GRAND  LODGE  OF
Maraham,  Brazil.
Time  of  Meeting.
1st  Tuesday.
2d  Friday  af.  full  moon.
1st  and  last  Saturdays.
2d  Wednesday.
IRELAND.
CENTRAL   AMERICA.
Lodge.
British  Constitutional,  E.  R.,
Royal  Essex,  E.  R.,
Concordia  Venezolana,  E.  R.,
Orphan,  E.  R.,
St.  John's,  E.  R.,
Location.
Bay  of  Honduras.
Belize,  Honduras.
Angostura,  Colombia.
Rio  de  Janeiro.
Rio  de  Janeiro.
MEXICO.
Les  Hospitaliers  des  Deux  Mondes.

--- Sayfa 567 ---
EUROPE — WEST  INDIES.
555
EUROPE.
UNDER  THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  ENGLAND.
No.         Lodge.
132  St,  John's,
178  Inhabitants',
345  Friendship,
437  St.  John  and  St.  Paul,
444  Aufgehenden     Morgen-
rothe,
482  Calpean,
484  Union  Lanzarotina,
588  Union  of  Malta,
654  Pythagoras,
756  Zetland,
1024  Moralidad  y,
Location.
Gibraltar.
Gibraltar.
Gibraltar.
Valetta,  Malta.
Frankfurt  o.  M.
Gibraltar.
Lanzarote,  Canary  Isles.
Malta.
Coreyra,  Corfu.
Valetta,  Malta.
Filantropia,  Cadiz.
Time  of  Meeting.
1st  &  2d  Wednesdays .
2d  Monday.
1st  Thursday.
UNDER  GRAND  LODGE  OF  IRELAND.
325    Gibraltar,  Spain.
338     Lisbon,  Portugal.
339     Lisbon,  Portugal.
341     Lisbon,  Portugal.
344     Lisbon,  Portugal.
347     Algesiras,  Spain.
387     Malta.
WEST   INDIES.
UNDER  GRAND  LODGE  OF  ENGLAND.
Lodges  with  the  *  prefixed  have  Chapters  attached.
No.         Lodge.
69    Mother,
104*  St.  Michael,
232*  Albion,
250*  Royal,
271*  Atlantic  Phoenix,
283    Somerset,
291*  Friendly,
Location.
Basse-Terre,  St.  Christophers.
Barbadoes.
Bridge  Town,  Barbadoes.
Kingston,  Jamaica.
Hamilton,  Bermuda.
Somerset,         "
Kingston,  Jamaica.
36
Time  of  Meeting.

--- Sayfa 568 ---
556
world's  masonic  register.
Time  of  Meeting.
295    Union,
S08*  Union,
447*  Sussex,
448*  Athol,
449*  Seville,
B449    Concord,
450*  Cornwall,
458*  Harmonic,
461*  Loyalty,
510    Chosen  Friends,
539*  Friendly,
541*  Mount  Olive,
585*  Philanthropic,
600    Clarence,
649*  Royal  Victoria,
682    Fellowship,
686    Trelawny,
713    Amity,
723*  St.  John,
746  Medcalf,
747  Friendship  &  Harmony,
754  Union  et  Concordia,
755  Victoria,
762    Albion,
837     Trinity,
930    Turk's  Island  of  Forth,
939     Igualdad,
967     Star  in  the  West,
1107    Hamilton,
Curacoa.
Georgetown,  D'emarara.
Kingston,  Jamaica.
Lucca  Bay,     "
St.  Anne's  Bay,  Jamaica.
Spanish  Town,         "
Montego  Bay,  "
Island  of  St.  Thomas.
Ireland  Island,  Bermuda.
Bosseau,  Dominica.
Montego  Bay,  Jamaica.
Demarara.
Port  of  Spain,  Trinidad.
Old  Koad,  St.  Christopher.
New  Providence,  Bahamas.
New  Amsterdam,  Berbice.
Falmouth,  Jamaica.
Bridge  Town,  Barbadoes.
St.  John,  Antigua.
Savannalamar,  Jamaica.
Lucea,  "
Kingston,  "
Kingstown,  St.  Vincent.
Castris,  St.  Lucia.
San  Fernando,  Trinidad.
Turk's  Island,  Bahamas.
Island  of  Curacoa.
St.  John,  Antigua.
Spanishtown,  Jamaica.
1st  Thursday.
2d  Thursday.
2d  Wednesday.
Sat.  near  full  moon.
1st  Thursday.
1st  Wednesday.
2d  Wednesday.
1st  Monday.
4th  Monday.
1st  Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
1st  Wednesday.
1st  Thursday.
1st  Wednesday.
1st  Monday.
UNDER  GRAND  LODGE  OF  SCOTLAND.
No.  Lodge.
200  St.  George,
206  Scotia,
231  Union,
251  United  Brothers,
285  St.  George,
324  Caledonia,
336  Mount  of  Olives,
340  Scotia,
344  Elgin,
346  Glenlyon,
359  Union,
367  Athole  Union,
368  East  Star,
369  St.  Andrew  Kilwinning,
372  St.  John,
Location.
St.  George,  Bermuda.
Scotia,  Barbadoes.
Nassau,  New  Providence.
Trinidad.
Grenada.
n
St.  Christopher.
Barbadoes.
Jamaica.
Falmouth,  Jamaica.
Port  of  Spain,  Trinidad.
St.  Andrews,  Jamaica.
Matthewtown,  Inagua,  Bahamas.

--- Sayfa 569 ---
AUSTRALASIA.
557
"UNDER  GRAND  LODGE  OF  IRELAND.
No.  Lodge.  Location.
220
 Bermuda.
223
 St.  Lucia.
622
 Barbadoes.
690
 Trinidad.
UNDER   GRAND   ORIENT  AND   SUPREME  COUNCIL  FOR
CUBA.
1  La  Fraternidad,
Cuba.
2  La  Prudenoia,
Cuba.
3  San  Andres,
Cuba.
4  La  Union  Cubana,
Cuba.
PORTO  RICO.
La  Restauracion,
Maya
AUSTRALASIA.
UNDER  GRAND-  LODGE  OF  ENGLAND.
Lodges  with,  the  *  prefixed  have  Chapters  attached.
NEW  SOUTH  WALES.
No.         Lodge.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
548*  Australian,
Sydney.
668*  St.  John,
Parramatta.
804    Mailland  Unity,
West  Maitland.
1st  Thursday.
814    Australian  Harmony,
Masonic  Hall,  Sydney.
3d  Monday.
842     Australia,
Goulbourn.
843    Sydney  Samaritan,
Sydney.
865    Armidale  Unity,
New  England.
Wednesday  af.  f.  m,
903    Unanimity  and  Concord,
Illawarra.
904    Independent,
Great  Western  District.
941     Zetland  Australian,
Sydney.
3d  Tuesday.
942    Cambrian  of  Australia,
Sydney.
Friday  af.  f.  m.
969    Prince  of  Wales,
Llanelly.
1st  Tuesday.
991    Newcastle  of  Concord,
City  of  Newcastle.
1st  Friday.
1043    Wellington,
Mudgee.
1061    Opher,
Orange  Western  Dist.
Last  Thursday.

--- Sayfa 570 ---
558
No.
Lodge.
WORLD'S   MASONIC  REGISTER.
Location.
Time  or  Meetoto.
1065  Marine  of  Newcastle,
1076  Southern  Cross,
1098  North  Australian,
1119  Robt.  Burns  of  Australia,
Newcastle.
Campbell  Town.
North  Brisbane.
Sydney.
Wed.  near  f.  m.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
Wednesday  n.  f.  m.
SOUTH  AUSTRALIA.
613
S.  Australian  of  Friendship,
Adelaide.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
743
Harmony  of  S.  Australia,
Adelaide.
Thursday  b.  f.  m.
853*  United  Tradesmen's,
Adelaide.
Tuesday  b.  f.  m.
854
Fidelity,
Gawler.
Tuesday  af.  f.  m.
855
Kooringa,
Kooringa.
Monday  af.  f.  m.
872
Unity,
Port  Adelaide.
Thursday  af.  f.  m.
933
Truth  of  North  Adelaide,
North  Adelaide.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
975
Concord,
Adelaide.
1st  Tuesday  af.  f.  m.
VICTORIA.
773
Australasia,
Melbourne.
Friday  near  f.  m.
697*
Australia  Felix,
Melbourne.
2d  Friday.
801
Unity  and  Prudence,
Geelong.
Thursday  n.  f.  m.
841
Viotoria,
Portland.
917
St.  Kilda,
St.  Eilda.
1st  Wednesday.
921
Hohson's  Bay,
Williamstown,
924*  Golden  Bendigo,
Sandhurst.
956
Victoria,
Ballarat.
993
Mount  Alexander,
Castlemain.
Tuesday  near  f.  m.
1015
Yarrowee,
Ballarat.
Wednesday  nearf.  m.
1016
Yarra  Yarra,
Emerald  Hill.
2d  Thursday.
1018
Mt.  Franklin  of  Hiram,
Talbot.
Thur.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1019
Ballarat,
Ballarat.
1st  Monday.
1020
Boroondara,
Hawthorne.
Tuesday  near  f.  m.
1029* Collingwood,
Collingwood.
Monday  b.  f.  m.
1030
Beechworth  of  St.  John,
Beechworth.
Thur.  on  or  n  f.  m.
1031* Meridian  of  St.  John,
Melbourne.
1st  Thursday.
1046
United  Tradesmen's,
Ballarat.
Thursday  next  f.  m.
1047
Mackenzie,
Maldon.
Thur.  nearest  f.  m.
1048
Industry,
Williamstown.
2d  Thursday.
1049
Mariners,
Melbourne.
4th  Monday.
1050
Mount  Macedon,
Gisborne.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1054
Co'mbermere,
East  Collingwood.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1064
Concord,
Castlemain.
1  st  Monday  af .  f.  m.
1070
Sandridge  Marine,
Sandridge.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
1071
Maryborough,
Maryborough.
1st  Wednesday.
1072
Corinthian,
Sandhurst.
Wednesday  b.  f.  m.
1093
Richmond,
Richmond.
Tuesday  af.  f.  m.
1095
Southern  Cross,
Tarrangower.
Tuesday  af.  f.  m.
1100
Zetland,
Kyncton.
Wednesday  af.  f.  m.
1101
Creswick  Havilah,
Creswick.
Mon.  on  or  b.  f.  m.

--- Sayfa 571 ---
AUSTRALASIA.
559
No.
Lodge.
NEW  ZEALAND.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
758  New  Zealand  Pacific,
879  Unanimity,
885  St.  Augustine,
968  Mount  Egmont,
990  Waitemata,
1007  Tongariro,
1037  Southern  Star,
1062  Southern  Cross,
Wellington.
Lyttelton.
Christ-church.
New  Plymouth.
Auckland.
Wanganui.
Nelson.
Eaiapoi.
3d  Monday.
4th  Thursday.
Wed.  on  or  b.  f.  m.
1st  Wednesday.
3d  Monday.
1st  Thursday.
WESTERN  AUSTRALIA.
712     St.  John,
Perth.
763    Perth  Unity,
Perth.
TASMANIA.
'
781*  Tasmanian  Union,
Hobart  Town.
2d  Thursday.
901*  Hope,
Launceston
Tuesday  n.  f.  m.
989    Charity,
Launceston.
Friday  at  or  n.  f.  m
992    Faith,
Launceston.
Monday  near  f.  m.
1021    Peace,
Longford.
1102    Derwent,
New  Norfolk.
Tuesday  n.  f.  m.
1103    Pacific,
Hobart  Town.
4th  Thursday.
UNDER  GRAND  LODGE  OF  SCOTLAND.
No.        Lodge.
341  Adelaide,
358  St.  Andrew,
366  United  Tradesmen,
377  Sydney,
378  Newton  Kilwinning,
379  Royal  Albert,
381  Harmony,
382
386  Wooloomoolloo,
387  Star  in  the  South,
388  Judah,
Location.
South  Australia.
Sydney.
Geelong,  Victoria.
Tarbolton,  New  South  Wales.
Sydney,  "  "
Sydney,  Cape  Breton.
West  Maitland,  N.  S.  W.
..Port  Macquarrie,    "
Sydney,
Deniliguin,  "
Melbourne,  Victoria.
"UNDER  GRAND  LODGE  OF  IRELAND.
«  Location.
no.  ,
gg    Hobart  Town,  Van  Diemen's  Land.
260    Sydney,  New  South  Wales.
266         "
267         "
275    Windsor,  "

--- Sayfa 572 ---
560  world's  masonic  register.
No.  Lodge.  Location.
313
 Hobart  Town,  Van  Diemen's  Land.
326
  "  "
345
  "  "
346
 Launceston,  "
348   Auckland,  New  Zealand.
349
 Melbourne,  Australia.
363
 Adelaide,  South  Australia.
368
 Melbourne,  Victoria.
370
 East  Collingwood,  Victoria.
380
 Melbourne,  Victoria.
EAST  INDIES.
UNDER  GRAND  LODGE  OF  ENGLAND.
Lodges  with  the  *  prefixed  have  Chapters  attached.
No.  Lodge.  Location.  Time  of  Meeting.
80    Star  in  the  East,  Calcutta,  Bengal.
94     Stewards',  Freemasons'  Hall,  Madras.
126*  Industry  &Perseverance,Calcutta,  Bengal.
175*  Perfect  Unanimity,  Madras.
242    Rising  Sun,  Fort  Marlborough.
265     True  Friendship,  Calcutta,  Bengal.
279    Humility  with  Fortitude,  Fort  William,  Calcutta.
282     Marine,  Calcutta,  Bengal.
284    Anchor  and  Hope,  Calcutta,  Bengal.
293    Neptune,  Prince  of  Wales's  Island.
325*  Rock,  Trichinopoly,  Madras.
326*  Social  Friendship,  Madras.
340*  Universal  Charity,  Madras.
480    Benevolent,  Bombay.
532     Hope,  Ahmednugger,  Bombay.
646*  Perseverance,  Bombay.
550    Independence  with  Phi-
lanthropy, Bengal.
551*  Courage  with  Humanity.Calcutta,  Bengal.
596*  Hope,  Meerut,  Bengal.  2d  Friday.
598     Orion  in  the  West,  Bombay  Artillery,  Bombay.
609     True  Brothers,  Dinapore,  Bengal.  1st  &  3d  Weds.
619     Oriental  Star,  Cannanore,  Malabar.
622     Neilgherry,  Ootacamund,  Madras.
628*  St.  John's,  Secunderabad,  Madras.
634  Social  &  MilitaryVirtues.Madras.
635  Universal  Charity,  Madras.

--- Sayfa 573 ---
EAST   INDIES.
561
No.
Lodge.
Location.
Time  of  Meeting.
636  Honour  &  Humanity,       Madras.
637  Military  &  Social  Friend-
ship, Madras.
638  Taprobane,  Madras.
639  Corinthian,  Madras.
641*  Harmony,  Cawnpore,  Bengal.
664  Doric,  Eamptee,  Madras.
665  St.  John's,  Kandy,  Ceylon.
673*  Himalayan  Brotherhood,Simla,  Bengal.
684    Goodwill,  Bellary,  Madras.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
685    Armenia,
Madras.
710    Bangalore  Cantonment, Bangalore,  Madras.
715    St.  John's,
Calcutta.
2d  &  4th  Fridays.
718    St.  Helena,
St.  Helena.
734    St.  Andrew's,
Kamptee,  Madras.
740    Kilwinning  in  the  East, Calcutta,  Bengal.
748*  Zetland  in  the  East,
Singapore.
Last  Monday.
761*  Star  of  Hope,
Agra,  Bengal.
First  Wednesday.
794    Philanthropy,
Maulmain.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
807    St.  George's,
Bombay.
810    Morning  Star,
Lucknow,  Bengal.
2d  &  4th  Weds.
823*  Charity,
Umballa,  Bengal.
831*  Pilgrims  of  Light,
Mount-road,  near  Madras.
4th  Saturday.
846    Neptune,
Georgetown,  Prince  of  Wales'
3
Island.
3d  Thursday.
852*  Kyber,
Peshawur,  Bengal.
897    Star  of  Burmah,
Rangoon,  Bengal.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays,
906    Jullunder,
Jullunder,  Bengal.
1st  Wednesday.
922*  Dalhousie   of   Mussoorie
and  Deyrah,
Mussoorie,  Bengal.
2d  &  4th  Tuesdays.
925    Fidelity,
Darjeeling,  Bengal.
1st  &  3d  Thursdays
929    Arakan,
Akyab,  Bengal.
3d  Monday.
972    Astrea,
Thayetmys  Pegu,  Bengal.
2d  Wednesday.
973    Kamsey,
Rawul  Pindea,  Bengal.
1st  Monday.
974    Light  of  the  North,
Ferozepore,  Bengal.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
984    Triune  Brotherhood,
Subathoo,  Bengal.
3d  Wednesday.
1038    British,
Port  Louis,  Mauritius.
1st  Wednesday.
1042    Fidelity,
Singapore.
Last  Monday.
1058    Good  Hope,
Dacca,  Bengal.
1st  &  3d  Weds.
1059    Concord,
Bombay.
3d  Saturday.
1069     Union,
Kurrachee,  Bombay.
1084    Hope  and  Perseverance ;,  Lahore,  Bengal.
1st  &  3d  Mondays.
UNDER  GRAND  LODGE  OF  SCOTLAND.
342  Rising  Star,  Western  India.
343  St.  Andrew's  in  the  East,  Poonah.
350    Hope,  Kurrachee.

--- Sayfa 574 ---
562  world's  masonic  register.
No.  Lodge.  Location.  Time  of  Heetino.
351  Perseverance,  Bombay.
371  St.  David'a  in  the  East,   Calcutta,  Bengal.  1st  &  3d  Tuesdays.
389  St.  Paul's,  Mhow,  Bengal,  India.
TUKKEY,  ASIA  MINOR,
UNDER  GRAND  LODGE  OF  SCOTLAND.
No.  Lodge.  Location.  Time  op  Meeting.
355    Felix  Aden,  Arabia.
373    Star  in  the  East,  Turkish  Contingent.
UNDER  GRAND  LODGE  OF  ENGLAND.
988    Oriental,  Constantinople.  First  Friday.
1108    Homer,  Smyrna.
UNDER  GRAND  LODGE  OF  IRELAND.
335    Port  Louis,  Maritius.
CHINA.
UNDER  GRAND  LODGE  OF  ENGLAND.
Lodges  with  the  *  prefixed  have  Chapters  attached.
No.  Lodge.  Location.  Timk  of  Meeting.
735*  Royal  Sussex,  Canton.  Second  Monday.
768    Zetland,  Victoria,  Hong  Kong.  First  Wednesday.
832    Northern  of  China,  Shanghae.

--- Sayfa 575 ---
AFRICA.  563
AFRICA.
UNDER  GRAND  LODGE  OF  ENGLAND.
Lodges  with  the  *  prefixed  have  Chapters  attached.
No.  Lodge.  Location.  Time  of  Meeting.
416     Torridzonian,  Cape  Coast  Castle,  Gold  Coast.
419*  British,  Cape  of  Good  Hope.  3d  Saturday.
468     Free  Town  Good  Intent,  Sierra  Leone.
Cape  of  Good  Hope.  Monday  near  f.  m.
Graham  Town,  C.  of  Good  Hope.
Cape  Coast.
Bathurst,  River  Gambia.  2d  Wednesday.
Sovereignty,  C.  of  Good  Hope.  1st  Wednesday.
Fort  Beaufort,  "  1st  Wednesday.
King  William's  Town,  C.  of  G.  H.
Port  Elizabeth,  C.  of  Good  Hope.  1st  Tuesday.
D'UrbaD,  Port  Natal.  2d  Thursday.
Cape  Coast  Castle,  West  Coast
of  Africa.  4th  Monday.
UNDER  GRAND  ORIENT  OF  FRANCE.
Lodge.  Location.
Les  Pyramids,  Alexandria,  Egypt.
Les  15  Artists,  Port  Louis,  He  Maurice.
La  Paix,  "  "
La  Triple  Esperanee,  "
L'Esperance,  Cap  de  Bonne,  Esperanee.
473*  Hope,
545
Albany,
599
Gold  Coast  St.  John,
867
Gambia,
871
Sovereignty,
884
Zetland,
987
Fordyce,
1013
Goodwill,
1040
Port  Natal,
1075
Gold  Coast,

--- Sayfa 576 ---
APPENDIX.
ARKANSAS.
BENTON,  Saline  County.
Holt,  George  M.,  M.D.,  Physician,  Surgeon,  and  Obstetrician.      G.  Marshal,
Grand  Lodge;   S.  D.,  Benton,  34;   G.  Marshal,  Grand  Chapter;   Union  R.  A.
chap.,  2.
CALIFORNIA.
VTSALIA,  Tulare  County.
Meckley,  Isaac  S.,  Merchant.    Visalia,  128.
CANADA.
T  O  H  O  N  T  O.
Gable,  Oliver,  Gentleman.     W.  M.,  King  Solomon's,  22,  G.  R.  C.  and  Past
Senior  "Warden ;  Scribe  N.,  King  Solomon's  chap.,  8  ;  G.  R.  C.
CONNECTICUT.
COLLINSVILLE.
Barrett,  N.  N.,  Foreman  Finishing  Department  As  Manufactory.     P.  M.,
Tillage,  29 ;  Pythagoras  chap.,  17 ;  Washington  com.,  1 ;  Junior  Grand  Warden.
MYSTIC  BRIDGE.
Landers,  Charles  S.,  Painter.    W.  M.,  Charity,  68 ;  Union  chap.,  7 ;  Cushing
conn.,  4 ;  Palestine  com.,  6.
NEW  HAVEN.
Brown,  Charles,  Soap  and  Candle  Manufacturer.    Wooster,  79.
Peck,  L.  G.,  Attorney  at  Law.     Hiram,  1 ;   P.  K.,  Franklin  chap.,  2 ;  Har-
mony coun.,  8 ;  New  Haven  com.,  2.
Shears,  Rev.  A.  G.,  M.A.,  Principal  and  Proprietor  Suburban  Home  School.
Hiram,  1.
Storer,  E.  G.     G.  Sec,  Grand  Lodge ;   G.  Sec,  Grand  Chapter ;   G.  Rec,
Grand  Council;   P.  G.  M.;   G.  Rec,  Grand  Encampment ;  Hiram,  1;  Frank-
lin chap.,  2.;    P.  H.  P.;    P.  T.  111.,  G.  M.  Harmony  coun.,  8;   New  Haven
com.,  2.
(564)

--- Sayfa 577 ---
APPENDIX.  565
ITOBWALK.
Daskam,  Geo.  F.,  Merchant.  P.  M.,  St.  John's,  6 ;  P.  H.  P.,  Washington
chap.,  25  ;  P.  G.  M.,  Clinton  com.,  3 ;  P.  G.  M.,  Grand  Lodge ;  P.  G.  M.  P.,
Grand  Council ;  P.  G.  M.,  Grand  Commandery.
MASSACHUSETTS.
BOSTON.
Heard,  John  T.,  Merchant,  4  Louisburg  Square.    Past   Grand  Master  of
Massachusetts;  P.  M.,  Columbian  Lodge;   Boston  Commandery  of  Knights
Templar.
"WHITINSVILLB.
Prest,  Ebenezer.    Temple  Lodge.
NEW  MEXICO.
SABTTA  FB,
Elsberg,  Gustav,  Merchant.    Montezuma,  109.
NEW  YORK.
ALBANY,
Goewey,  John  A.,  Hollow-ware,  Locks,  and  Safe  Works.  P.  M.,  Temple,  14 ;
Temple  chap.,  5 ;  Temple  com.,  2.
COLESVTLLE,  Broome  County.
Bishop,  Piatt,  Parmer  and  Student.    Windsor,  442.    (P.  0.,  Ouaquaqua.)
NOVA  SCOTIA.
HALIFAX.
Scott,  Archibald,  Commission  Merchant  and  Insurance  Agent,  30  Bedford
Row.  Past  Senior  Grand  Warden ;  P.  M.,  St.  John's,  187 ;  G.  Treas.,  Grand
Lodge,  under  Registry  of  Grand  Lodge  of  England.
Wisswell,  William  J.,  Merchant.  St.  Andrew's,  ■  137,  E.  R. ;  Mark  Master
Mason.
PENNSYLVANIA.
BSIDGEWATEE.
Woodcock,  Albert,  Parmer.     P.  M.,  Warren,  240  ;  Warren  chap.,  180.
HAHKISBima
Parke,  Benjamin,  V.  P.  Commonwealth  Insurance  Co.  P.  M.,  Perseverance,
21;  Perseverance  chap.,  21;  Parke  coun.,  6;  Parke  com.,  11;  P.  G.  H.  P.,
Grand  Chapter ;  P.  R.  E.  G.  Commander,  Grand  Commandery,  Pa.

--- Sayfa 578 ---
566  world's  masonic  register.
MILESBTJBG.  Centre  County.
Curtin,  Constans,  Eagle  Iron  Works.    Bellefonte,  268  ;  Lafayette  chap.,  163.
PHILADELPHIA.
Benners,  Wm.  J.,  Commission  Merchant,  210^  Walnut  Street.  Harmony,
52 ;  Columbia  chap.,  91 ;  Philadelphia  coun  ,  11 ;  St.  John's  com.,  4.
Boardman,  H.  S.,  Manufacturer  of  Britannia-ware,  243  and  245  Arch  Street.
Mount  Moriah,  155  ;  Harmony  chap.,  52.
Connell,  George,  Secretary  Mount  Moriah  Cemetery  Co.,  Arch,  above  9th  St.
Member  of  Penna.  Legislature.  P.  M.,  Philadelphia,  72  ;  Keystone  chap.,  175 ;
St.  John's  com.,  4.
Drexel,  A.  J.     Lodge,  51 ;  Excelsior  Mark,  216.
Farrell,  John,  Fire-proof  Safe  Manufacturer,  Chestnut  Street.  Phoenix,  130;
E.  A.  M.
Flanagan,  James,  Monument  House,  1320  Beach  Street,  above  Hanover.
Lodge,  3;  Girard  Mark,  214.
Fuller,  Zelotes,  Editor  and  Publisher  of  United  States  Journal,  310  Chestnut
Street.     Lodge,  3 ;  K.  T.
Hart,  George  H.,  Office  of  Magnetic  Telegraph  Co.,  302  Chestnut  Street.
P.  M.,  Columbian,  91 ;  P.  H.  P.,  Philadelphia  chap.,  169;  St.  John's  com.,  4.
Hyatt,  Wm.  H,  Embroideries  and  White  Goods,  303  Market  Street.  Solo-
mon's, 114.
Michenor,  John  G.,  Attorney  at  Law,  S.  E.  corner  6th  and  Walnut  Streets.
Late  P.  M.,  Shekinah,  246.
Town,  Gustavus  V.,  Book,  Job,  and  Fancy  Printer,  320  Chestnut  Street.
Philadelphia,  72  ;  Harmony  chap.,  52  ;  Philadelphia  coun.,  11.
WILLIAMSBUBG,  Blair  County.
Barnhart,  Thomas,  Methodist  Preacher.  W.  M.,  Clearfield,  314;  Catawissa
chap.,  178  ;  Crusade  com.,  12.
WISCONSIN.
WEST  HUKLEY,  Ulster  County.
France,  D.  J.     Morning  Star,  101;  Beloit  coun.,  1 ;  Janesville  com.,  3.

--- Sayfa 579 ---
THE  SATURDAY  EYENWG  POST.
Sgltnbiir  Stes!  |rwtrattaw  Sluices!!  S0I&  Informa&n!!!
•
 &^
In  laying  their  Prospectus  again  before  the  public,  the  Proprietors  of  "  THE  OLDEST  AND  BEST  OP
THE  WEEKLIES"  need  enter  upon  no  long  array  of  promises.  They  may  simply  state,  that  they  design
making  THE  POST  for  the  future  what  it  has  been  for  the  past,  a  repository  alike  of  delightful  amuse-
ment and  equally  entertaining  instruction.  Interesting  stories,  and  choice  sketches,  by  THE  BEST
WRITEKS,  will  always  be  found  in  THIS  POST.  Our  stories  for  the  last  year  have  been  generally
acknowledged  to  be  of  the  most  interesting  character;  and  we  design  not  to  allow  any  fulling  off  in  this
respect — though  any  improvement  is  hardly  poBBible.  But  THE  POST  also  aims  to  instruct :  it  contains
weekly
An  Agricultural  Department,         The  IMarliets,  and  Bank  Note  List,
Choioe  Receipts,  Letter  from  i*aris,
Domestic)  and.  Foreign  News,  Miscellaneous  Information,  eto.
  &$
NOTICES    OF    THE    PRESS.
A  Steeling  Family  Newspaper. — The  Saturday  Evening  Post  takes  leading  rank
among  the  family  newspapers  published  in  (his  country.  *  *  *  It  is
devoted  to  pure  literature,  news,  agriculture,  humor,  etc.,  and  has  a  commanding
claim  upon  the  families  of  the  land  for  approval  and  encouragement.
Exempt  from  that  too  apt  tendency  of  the  public  journalist  to  be  content  with
simply  reflecting  the  average  taste  of  the  community  in  which  he  lives,  they  find  in
the  conduct  of  their  sterling  family  paper  no  excuse  for  giving  prominence  to  a  class
of  details  which  would  shock  a  parent  to  have  fall  into  the  hands  of  a  family  of
children — but  inculcate  a  scrupulous  regard  for  the  fine.keen  edge  of  purity  and
modesty  inherent  in  the  mind  and  heart  of  young  people,  not  to  be  worn  out  by
familiarity  with  descriptions  that  no  after  time,  no  example,  no  gems  of  gold  can
ever  restore.
*  *  *  We  commend  it  to  those  who  would  supply  their  families  with  choice
and  profitable  reading  and  instruction. — Democrat,  Auburn,  N.  Y.
We  regard  the  Post  as  the  very  best  of  its  class.  It  is  edited  with  more  literary
taste  and  ability  than  any  other  paper  of  the  kind  with  which  we  are  acquainted —
is  always  readable  and  interesting,  and  when  we  have  a  few  minutes  to  while  away  in
that  kind  of  reading,  we  know  at  once  where  to  find  something  worth  spending  them
on. — Com.  Gazette,  Cleveland,  Ohio.
The  Saturday  Evening  Post. — We  have  to  acknowledge  the  receipt  of  this  fas-
cinating family  journal.  The  stories  are  well  written  and  beautifully  illustrated,
and  supplied  in  so  profuse  a  quantity  that  we  are  fairly  bewildered.  We  recom-
mend to  all.  The  Saturday  Evening  Post,  published  at  the  low  rate  of  $2  per  annum,
by  Deacon  &  Peterson,  319  Walnut  street,  Philadelphia. — Sentinel,  Cayuga,  Canada.
Saturday  Evening  Post. — This  is  one  of  the  best,  oldest,  and  most  popular
weeklies  in  the  country.  We  recollect,  when  a  youth,  how  carefully  we  filed  it
away  and  preserved  it.  Its  stories  and  other  reading  are  of  the  highest  order  of
literary  merit,  with  nothing  offensive  to  the  strictest  morals,  while  the  illustrations
are  appropriate  and  well  executed. — Gazette  and  Sentinel,  Plaquemine,  La.
This  highly  popular  and  excellent  weekly  newspaper  is  certainly  one  of  the  best
family  papers  published  in  America.  We  have  been  a  constant  reader  of  it  for
years,  and  can  bear  testimony  to  its  many  substantial  qualities.  It  is  peculiarly
adapted  to  the  wants  of  the  home  circle,  and  none  can  fail  to  read  it  without  pleas-
ure and  profit.  In  every  particular  which  goes  to  make  up  a  readable  paper,  it  will
be  found  unequaled  by  any  other.  The  best  and  most  popular  writers  of  England
and  America  contribute  regularly  to  its  columns,  while  the  farmer  and  mechanio
will  find  its  pages  rich  with  articles  of  utility.—  American,  Butler,  Pa.
TERMS   OF  THE  TOST.
8  copies    $10.00  a  year.
13     "             .                ...         15.00      "
■10     "
20.00      "
Single  copy
$2.00  a  year.
2  copies
3.00
1  copy  of  Post  and  Arthur's  Magazine    3.00
4  copies
6.00     "
To  the  getter-up  of  a  club  of  8,  or  either  of  the  largo  clubs,  we  send  a  copy  gratis
Address  DEACON  &  PETEKSON,
319  Walnut  Street,  Philadelphia.

--- Sayfa 580 ---
WATCHES  AND  JEWELRY.
WHOLESALE  AND   RETAIL.
Gold  Hunting  Lever  Watches,  full  jeweled,  18k.  case   $40.00
Gold  Lever  Watches,  open  face,  full  jeweled,  18k.  case    30.00
Silver  Hunting  Lever  Watches,  full  jeweled     18.00
Silver  open  face  Watches,  full  jeweled      14.00
Gold  Guard  and  Vest  Chains   $10  and  upwards.
Fine  Gold  Wedding  Rings    $3  to  $10.
With  a  splendid  assortment  of  SILVER  WARE  and  PLATED  WARE  of
all  kinds.
Always  on  hand  a  beautiful  assortment  of  DIAMOND  JEWELRY.  Dia-
monds mounted  to  order.
HAIR  JEWELRY  made  in  the  most  beautiful  manner.
Watches  and  Jewelry  carefully  repaired  and  warranted.  We  can  send  Watches  or
Jewelry  by  mail  with  perfect  safety.     Call  or  address
LEWIS  LADOMUS  &  Co.,
802  Chestnut  St.,  Philadelphia.
PREMIUM  GILT  MOULDING,  LOOKING  GLASSES,  AND  PICTURE  FRAMES
Of  every  description  constantly  on  hand,  and  made  to  order,  at  the  lowest  price,  at  my  manufactory,
47  &  49  N.  Ninth  St.,  2d  door  below  Arch,  Philadelphia.
GILDING  and  CHURCH  WORK  of  eveTj  kind  done.
PAINTINGS  AND  ENGRAVINGS,  by  the  best  American  and  Foreign  Artists.    Also,
Large  and  small  size  LOOKING  GLASSES,  of  every  variety  of  design.  Also,  every  kind  of  PICTURE
FRAMES,  both  oval  and  square.
The  attention  of  the  trade  and  citizens  in  general  is  called  to  my  extensive  stock  of  GILT  MOULDINGS,
which  will  not  soil  by  handling,  and  for  which  a  Medal  was  awarded  by  the  Franklin  Institute.  These  are  manu-
factured by  myself,  and  can  be  put  together  to  fit  any  glass  or  picture  frame  in  a  few  minutes.
WINDOW  CORNICES  of  the  most  elaborate  and  plain  styles.
ORDERS  FOR  PORTRAITS  executed  in  the  best  style  and  by  the  best  Artists.
All  kind  of  ROOM  CORNICE  MOULDING  constantly  on  hand  and  for  Sale  Wholesale  and  Retail.
OLD  FRAMES  and  every  article  in  the  line  regilded.  By  sending  a  line  through  Blood's  Dispatch,  all  per-
sons will  be  waited  on.
Gorman  and  French  Looking  Glass  Plates,  Silver  Leaf,  Gold  Size,  Oil  Size,  Picture  Glass,  eto.
j(JQf  Western  and  Southern  Merchants  will  find  it  greatly  to  their  advantage  to  call  before  purchasing,  as  I  am
determined  to  sell  at  the  very  lowest  price  for  cash  or  approved  paper.
F.  GABETLEWITZ,
Mos.  47  and  49  N.  Ninth,  2d  door  below  Arch.
DR.  T.  L.  VANDERBECK,
SURGEON  DENTIST,
No.  246  S.  SIXTH  ST.,
PHILADELPHIA.
Head  Quarters  for  the  Extraction  of  Teeth  or
Roots  without  pain.
Dentistry  in  all  its  branches.
TERMS  LOW.
Office  Hours,  Day  and  Night.
JACOB  KIRCHEM,
MANUFACTURES,  OF
:sro  ok^s
PATENT  PADLOCKS,
For  Railroad  Cars  &  Switches,
Also  for  Stores  and  other  purposes.
No.  8  S.  SEVENTH  ST.,
PHILADELPHIA,  PA.
Jobbing  Promptly  Attended  to.

--- Sayfa 581 ---
PLllMBlHi
GAS  AND  STEAM  FITTING
EXECUTED  .
ALL  ORDERS  ATTENDED  TO  PROMPTLY.
COUNTRY  WORK
Will  be  Executed  with  Dispatch  and  without  Imposition.
The  Subscriber,  with  confidence,  solicits  the  public  patronage,  de-
pending solely  on  the  character  of  his  work  for  the  best  recommend-
ation,
WM.  S.  PIERCE.
Shop :  IN".  E.  eor.  6th.  and  Spruce,
Residence:    608  Carpenter  Street,
FhUaMphia,    Fa.
photographs;
LIFE-SIZE  PHOTOGRAPHS  in  oil,  from  life  or  Daguerreotypes.
PHOTOGRAPHS  in  water  colors,  pastil  or  India  Ink.
PHOTOGRAPHS,  plain,  unsurpassed,  in  colors  the  most  beautiful.
DAGUERREOTYPE  PORTRAITS  of  all  sizes  and  styles,  at  the
IROOT    <3-  .A-  X,  L  IE  ZR  ■3T,
NO.  820  CHESTNUT  .STREET,
OPPOSITE    THE    GIRAED    HOUSE.
With  the  corps  of  Artists  formerly  at  Fifth  and  Chestnut  Streets,  we  guarantee  to
maintain  the  well-known  superiority  of  Portraits  of  this  popular  Gallery.
DR.  BUSHNELL,  Proprietor.
B.  J.  COOKE,  Agt.,
WHOLESALE  DEALER  IN
O    Ij    O    O    IS.    S,
149  N.  THIRD  St.,  Philadelphia.
THOMAS  A.  WINKWORTH,
DEALER  IN
LEATHER,  LASTS,  SHOE-THREAD,
.       SHOE   FINDINGS,
AND
Boot  and  Shoe  Manufacturers'  Articles
OS  EVERY  KIND.
No.  1325  Market  St.,  below  Broad,
PHILADELPHIA.
4S-  Patent  Leather  and  Calf  Skin  Boot  Legs,
English  Walking  Shoe  Uppers  of  every  description.
Women's  Lasting  Gaiter  Uppers.

--- Sayfa 582 ---
BECKHAUS    &   ALLGAIEE,
MANUFACTURERS    OP   EVERT   DESCRIPTION    OP   FIRST    CLASS    (FIRST   PREMIUM)
CARRIAGES,
Light  and  heavy,  comprising
COACHES,  CAtECHES,  MOCK  CALECHES,  BAROUCHES,
PHAETONS,  COUPES,  etc.  etc.,
In  every  variety  of  style  and  finish.
A  CHOICE  ASSORTMENT  ALWAYS  OH  HAND  AND  FOR  SALE.
Orders  received  from  all  parts  of  the  world,  and  executed  with  care  and  dispatch.
All  the  latest  Parisian 'styles  regularly  received  and  improved  upon.
Manufactory  and  Warerooms,
1204  ^n.A.iNriK.i^omiD  -A.-v:E3ia-TTE,
ABOVE  GIRARD  AVENUE,
fpaMjp,  fa.
8@-  The  Richmond  and  Girard  Avenue  City  Passenger  Railroad  Cars  pass  the
premises  every  few  minutes.
BALTIMORE  AND  PHILADELPHIA  STEAMBOAT  COMPANY,  ERICSSON  LINE.
Via  Chesapeake  and  Delaware  Canal.
Through  from  Phila.  to  Baltimore  in  14  hours.    Daily,  at  3  o'Clock  P.M.
The  new  Iron  Steamboats  of  this  Company  are  now  running  regularly  between  this  City  and  Baltimore.    One
of  which  leaves  daily,  (SundayB  excepted,)  at  3  o'clock,  and  arrives  in  Baltimore  early  next  morning.
FREIGHTS  of  all  kinds  taken  at  the  lowest  rates.
Freights  for  the  following  cities  and  places  will  be  received,  and  forwarded  immediately  on  arrival  in  Balti-
more, by  the  first  conveyance,  and  at  the  lowest  rates.
■Washington,  D.  C.        Wheeling,  Va.  Annapolis,  Md.  St.  Louis,  Mo.
Georgetown,      "  Martinsburg,  Va„  Frederick,  Md.  Pittsburg,  Pa.
Alexandria,  Va.  Portsmouth,  Va.  Emmetsburg.  Md.         Bedford,  Pa.
Norfolk,         "  Fredericksburg,  Va.     Hagerstown,  Md.         Washington,  Pa.
Rlohmond,      "  Charlestown,  Va.  Cumberland,  Md.  Somerset,  Pa.
Petersburg,     "    _        Lynchburg,  Va.  Cincinnati,  Ohio.  Uniontown,  Pa.
Louisville,  Ky.  Hanover,  Pa.
Harper's  Ferry,  Va,     Winchester,  Va.
York,  Pa.
Weldon,  N.  C.
Henderson,  N.  C.
Gaston,  N.  C.
Raleigh,  N.  C.
Warrentown,  N.  C.
Ridgway,  N.  C.
And  all  points  on  the  Baltimore  and  Ohio  Railroad,  and  the  South  and  West  generally.
HORSES,  CATTLE,  LIVE  STOCK,  and  VEHICLES  of  all  kinds,  taken  at  the  lowest  rates.     Special  con-
tracts made  for  large  lots,  by  applying  at  the  office.
li'/f"  Shippers  will  please  send  a  memorandum  with  each  lot  or  package  of  goods,  with  name  of  Shipper,  Con-
signee, Destination,  Mark,  and  Number,  to  prevent  mistakes  and  save  trouble.  Blank  memorandums  can  be  had
by  applying  at  the  office.
A.  GROVES,  Jr.,  Wo.  19  South  Wharves.
SMITH  &  BROWN,
No.  215  N.  2d  St.,  above  Race,
Corner  of  Coates  Alley,  Third  and  Fourth  Story,
PHILADELPHIA.
Patterns  for  Castings  in  general,
MADE  TO  ORDER  WITH  ACCURACY
AND  DISPATCH.
GARRETSON  SMITH.
HENRY  BROWN.
JONES  &  REED,
MANUFACTURERS    OF
IRON  RAILING
FOR
Cemeteries,  Verandahs,  Balconies,
Steps,  Parks,  etc.
Jto.  222
CALLOWHILL  ST.,  below  Third,

--- Sayfa 583 ---
JAMES  VORIES.
HOUSE,  SIGN,  AND  WALL  PAINTING
DONE  WITH  DISPATCH,
AND  AT
PRICES  TO  STJIT  TIKE  TIMES,
COUNTRY  WORK  DONE  IN  THE  BEST  MANNER
AND  AT
FAIR  PRICES.
THE    BEST    MATEEIAL   USED.
OLD  GLAZING  AND  JOBBING
PEOMPTLY   ATTENDED   TO.
Thankful  for  past  patronage,  I  shall  always  endeavor  to  execute
my  work  in  such  an  honest  and  workmanly  manner  as  will  insure  the
continuance  of  such  as  intrust  me  with  their  work.
Shop:  1ST.  W.  cor.  11th.  and  Liooiast.
Residence:     1128  "Wood  Street,
PHILADELPHIA,  Pa.

--- Sayfa 584 ---
CHEAP    STOVE    STORE.
DAYID    JONES,
Formerly  No.  243  North  Second  Street,  now  Removed  to
S.  W.  CORNER  OF  NINTH  AND  MELON  STREETS,
A  large  assortment  of  Stoves,  Furnaces,  Tea  Kettles,  Plain  and  Enamelled  Boilers,
Scales,  Waffle  Irons,  Scuttles,  Shovels,  etc.,  constantly  on  hand.
Plain  and  Ornamental  Japanner,  Inlayer  Mother  of  Pearl.
Sign  Painting,  Gilding  and  Bronzing,  in  every  variety.
Jobbing  promptly  attended  to.
RANDALL  &  WILSON,
B.  B.  GUMPERT,
STAIR  BUILDERS, HOMCEOPATHIC
EIGHTEENTH  STREET,
Above  VINE,  East  side.
PHYSICIAN,
Flitlabefphia.
No.  982  North  Sixth  Street,
S,  B.— Hand  Rails  worked  to  order.
PHILADELPHIA,  PA.
SIEVES  AND  SCREENS.
from:
PENNSYLVANIA  WIRE  WORKS,
No.  226  Arch  Street,  below  Third,
PHILADELPHIA.
BAYLISS   &   DARBY.
Iron,  Brass,  and  Copper  Wire  Cloth,
WITH  EVEBT  DESCRIPTION  OP
PLAIN  AND  FANCY    WIP.E  WOEK.
MASONIC  LIBRARY.
See    Prospectus,    page    -476.
WORLD'S  MASONIC  REGISTER,
AND
listeical,  giograpjrintl,  Cfpnolagital  anfr  jfta&iiatl
Compbrant.
TO  BE  PUBLISHED  DURING  THE  YEAR  1861.
See  Prospectus,  page  475.

--- Sayfa 585 ---
PHILADELPHIA,  NO.  43  S.  FOURTH  ST.
•  •  "Itlfc
■lite
BLANK  BOOKS  of  the  very  beat  material  and  workmanship,  and  of  every
pattern  used  by
MERCHANTS,  MANUFACTURERS,  AND  BANKERS.
Also,  a  large  and  varied  collection  of
ENGRAVING  AND  LETTER  PRESS  PRINTING.
ALSO,
Letter  Copying  Books,  and  Presses ;   Cash  and  Deed  Boxes ;    Note,
Letter,  and  Cap  Writing  Papers  ;  Envelopes,  Pencils,  Pens.
A  large  assortment  of  General  Stationery.     Prices  low  and  uniform.     Persons
can  buy  as  cheaply  by  letter  as  though  they  called  in  person.
WI.  MANN,  43  S.  Fourth  St.,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
LEONARD  FISHER'S  HOTEL,
N"o.  1115   MARKET   STREET,
BETWEEN  ELEVENTH   AND   TWELFTH   STS.,
Phi^elphia,    Fa.
BOARDING  AND  LODGING.
GOOD  STABLING  AND  ATTENTIVE  HOSTLERS.
JAMES  ROBINSON,
■W-A-TaH    HVLA-KIEIR,,    JEWELEB,
AND  IMPORTER  OP
Clocks,  Watches,  and  Jewelry  of  every  description.
ALSO,  MANUFACTURER  OP
SILVER,  and  SILVER  PLATED  WARE;  GOLD,  SILVER,  and  STEEL  SPECTACLES,
No.  1031  MARKET  ST.,  below  11th,  N.  side,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
Clocks,  Watches,  and  Jewelry  neatly  repaired  at  the  shortest  notice.
Constantly  on  hand,  and  for  sale,  the  American  Manufactured  Watches.
Gilding  and  Plating  of  all  descriptions  done  neatly  to  order.
N  B  —Masonic,  Odd  Fellows,  and  other  Emblematic  Marks  made  to  order,  and  with  dispatch.  All  en-
graving done  by  the  best  workmen,  and  at  the  cheapest  rates.  The  subscriber  pays  particular  attention
to  the  getting  up  of  Masonic  Emblems.  jame£j    BOBINSOlf
37

--- Sayfa 586 ---
WETHERILL  HOUSE,
60S   -AJSTID   605   SANSOM   STREET,
f  pbMjip,  fa.
The  undersigned  respectfully  informs  Ms  friends,  gentlemen  of  the  bar,  and  the
public  generally,  that  the  WETHERILL  HOUSE  having  been  thoroughly  repaired,
is  open  for  Audits,  Arbitrations,  Committees,  Masters  in  Chancery,  etc.
Gentlemen  who  do  not  wish  to  injure  their  furniture  by  holding  large  meetings  in
their  offices,  will  find  the  WETHERILL  HOUSE  especially  adapted  to  their  accom-
modation and  comfort.
Respectfully,
J.  J.  BARTBAM,  Proprietor.
CASPER  M.  BERRY'S
N.  W.  corner  5th  and  Chestnut  Sts.,
ALSO,
16TH  AND  MARKET,  PHILADELPHIA.
THE  GOLDEN    FLEECE   HOTEL,
INo.  310  Cherry  Street,
(FIRST  •STREET   ABOVE   ARCH,  BETWEEN    THIRD   AND   FOURTH.)
I  have  had  it  refitted,  and  it  is  now  in  perfect  order  for  the  accommodation  of
guests.
Its  location  is  an  excellent  one,  being  in  the  centre  of  the  Jobbing  business  of  the
City.
I  should  be  pleased  if  you  would  favor  me  with  your  patronage,  when  you  visit
this  city.
Terms,  $1  per  Day.    $6  per  week.
WILLIAM  LEACH,  Proprietor.
THE
FULTON  HOUSE,
S.  E.  CORNER  OF
THIRD  and  GASKILL  Sts.,
f PaMpp,  fit.
RALPH  BENJAMIN,
PEOPEIETOE,
Late  of  Benjamin's  Hotel,  Ninth  and
Chatham  Streets,  N.  Y.
BOWEW  &  CO.,
LITHOGRAPHERS  AND  COLORISTS,
S.  W.  cor.  Eleventh  and  Chestnut  Sts.,  FhUaddpkia,
Execute  all  descriptions  of  Lithographic  and  Print
and  Map  Coloring  on  the  most  moderate  terms.
Particular  attention  to  Book  and  Commercial  work,
either  Plain  or  Colored,  and  to  the  Preparation  of
Plates  requiring  exactness  or  accuracy  of  draw-
ing or  coloring.  Plates  for  the  following  works
have  been  executed  at  this  establishment :  Audu-
bon's Birds  and  Quadrupeds,  Perry's  Japan  Expe-
dition, Binney's  Shells  of  the  TJ.  S.,  Baird's  Birds  of
North  America,  Emory's  Report  TJ.  S.  and  Mexican
Boundary  Survey,  Cassin's  Birds  of  California  and
Texas,  Maps  and  Plates  for  Report  of  Pacific  R.  R.
Survey,  McKenney  and  Hall's  Indians  of  N.  A.,
Plates  for  Journal  and  Proceedings  of  Academy  of
Sciences,  Philadelphia.
To  all  the  above  Plates  and  Maps  we  refer  with
confidence,  and  respectfully  solicit  examination.

--- Sayfa 587 ---
POLYTECHNIC    COLLEGE
01  THE
STATE    OF    PENNSYLVANIA,
MARKET  STREET  AND  WEST  PENN  SQUARE,
JNjifabefpfjta,
Incorporated  by  the  Legislature  in  1853,  organized  on  the  plan  of  the  Industrial  Colleges  of  Paris  and
Germany,  and  designed  to  supply  a  great  national  educational  want,  to  wit :  thorough  Collegiate  training
for  the  practice  of
Mine  Engineering,  Mechanical  Engineering,  Civil  Engineering,  Analytical  and
Industrial  Chemistry,  Metallurgy,  and  Architecture.
The  College  comprises
THE    SCIENTIFIC    SCHOOL,
the  courses  in  which  are  adapted  to  young  men  who  wish  to  pursue  scientific  studies,  without  regard  to
the  practice  of  one  of  the  industrial  professions,  and  Pour  Professional  Schools,  viz.:
THE    SCHOOL   OF   MINES,
THE    SCHOOL    OB1   CIVIL   ENGINEEBING-,
THE    SCHOOL   OF    MECHANICAL   ENG-INEEKINO,
THE    SCHOOL   OF   CHEMISTBY.
Architecture  and  Design  are  included  in  the  Engineering  courses,  and  ample  facilities  are  provided  for
Meld  and  Laboratory  Practice.
The  Autumnal  Session  begins  on  the  third  Monday  in  September;  the  Winter  Session,  on  the  first
Monday  in  November;  the  Spring  Session,  on  the  first  Monday  in  March.  Degrees  are  conferred  at  the
Annual  Commencement,  held  on  the  last  Thursday  in  June.
TERMS   PER   A.NNTJTSJL.
Scientific  School
$75  00
Professional  Schools,  full  first  year's  course
10    00
"  "  second  year's  course
120  00
To  the  Student  of  applied  Science  andjlngineering,  the  collateral  advantages  of  a  residence  in  Philadel-
phia are  not  surpassed  by  those  of  any  other  American  city.
For  Catalogues  and  other  information,  address  ALFBED   L.  KENNEDY,  M.D.,
President  op  Faculty.
"MEDAL   GUN   STORE."
NORTHEAST  CORNER  OF  SECOND  AND  WALNUT  STS.,
C«4til
JOHN  KEIDEE,
GUN  MAKER  AND  DEALER  IN  FIRE  ARMS
OF   ALL  KINDS.      ALSO,
FISHING    TACKLE
OP  EVERY   VARIETY.       AND   ALL  KINDS  OF
JS:F»OH.M2XrC3r    jgLE»X»JSL.HJk.ircri&
SUITED   TO   THE   GUN  AND   ANGLE.
Agent  for  the  celebrated  Dead  Shot  Gunpowder.  Guns  made  to  order  at
the  shortest  notice,  and  Repairs  punctually  attended  to.
Thankful  for  past  patronage,  I  solicit  your  custom,  and  will  do  all  in  my  power
to  give  the  best  satisfaction.  Give  me  a  call  at  my  old  stand  2d  and  Walnut
Streets.
N.  B.  Orders  received  for  the  purchase  and  sale  of  Dogs.
JOHN  KBIDEE,  Proprietor.

--- Sayfa 588 ---
PARIS  AND  PHILADELPHIA  FASHIONS
AND
SYSTEM  OF  GARMENT  CUTTING.
By  this  system  an  ordinary  cutter  is  at  once  enabled  to  successfully  compete  with
the  most  thoroughly  scientific.
Terms  greatly  reduced.  Plates  largely  increased  in  beauty.  Reports  increased
in  utility  and  simplicity.
Instructions  in  the  art  of  Garment  Cutting  will  be  given  by  the  publisher  or
agents,  to  those  desirous  of  learning  with  drafts.  Scales  and  protractor  accompany-
ing the  explanations  for  journeymen  in  making  up,  etc.  etc.,  for  $9.00  for  the  first
year,  and  $4.00  for  each  succeeding  year.  Persons  having  a  knowledge  of  the
Protractor  System  will  be  supplied  with  the  work  at  $4.00  per  annum  to  regular
subscribers.
Those  who  merely  wish  to  learn  the  art  of  Garment  Cutting,  and  subscribe  for
one  work,  or  one  year  only,  will  be  charged  $15.00  with  instructions,  or  $10.00
without  tuition  being  required.
Our  System  and  Colored  Plate  of  Fashions  will  be  supplied  at  $6.00  per  year.
The  System  and  Uncolored  Plate  of  Fashions  will  be  supplied  at  $4.00  per  year.
The  Colored  Plates  and  large  pattern  sheet  will  be  supplied  at  $2.00  per  year;  or
Bingle  Plate,  $1.50.  Uncolored  Plate  and  pattern  sheet  will  be  supplied  at  $1.50
per  year.     Single  copy,  $1.00.
Annrass  FKATTCIS  MA.HA1T,
No.  720  Chestnut  Street,  Philadelphia,  Pa.
New  Orleans,  6th  Jan.,  1844.
Dear  Sir — I  have  received  in  this  City,  the  broadcloth  coat  which  yon  have  had  the  goodness  to  send
me ;  and  I  pray  you  to  accept  my  thanks  and  acknowledgments  for  it.    It  fits  me  with  great  exactness,
and  has  reached  me  very  opportunely.    The  pleasure  of  wearing  it  will  be  much  enhanced  by  the  fact
of  its  being  made  exclusively  of  American  materials.
Wishing  you  health',  happiness,  and  prosperity,  I  am
Your  respectful  friend  and  obedient  servant,
FRANCIS  MAHAN,  Esq,  H.  CLAY.
EVANS  &  WATSON'S
SALAMANDER  SAFES,
BANK,  VAULT,  AND  BURGLAR  PROOF  SAFES.
STORE,
304
CHESTNUT  STREET,  PHILADELPHIA,  PA.
GUSTAVUS  V.  TOWN,
SI  00k,  $0b,  art  Jfanrg  f! xkitx,
320  Chestnut  and  4  Hudson  Sts.,
SECOND  STORY,  BACK,  OVER  ADAMS'S  EXPRESS,  PHILADELPHIA.
33foMs  anb  £a6efs  of  eoerg  Description.
Account  Books  and  Stationery  supplied  at  the  lowest  rates.

--- Sayfa 589 ---
The  Largest,  Cheapest,  and  Most  Fashionable
STOCK  OF
WATCHES  AND  JEWELRY
To  be  found  in  any  House  in  the  United  States,  of  every
imaginable  Style  and  Quality,
SO    PER    OE3STT.    CZEHEAIPEIB,
THAN  ANY  HOUSE   IN  THE   CITY.
444
■
North  Second  St.,
Such  as  Cameo,  Gold  Stone,  Gold  Stone  Mosaic,  Lava,  Jet,  Enameled,
Carbuncle,  Coral,  Pearl,  Garnet,  and  Bohemian  Sets,  Fins
and  Ear  Rings,  at  from  50  cts.  to  $70  per  Set,
in  every  Style  of  Mounting.
Jobbers,  Auctioneers,  Jewelers,  Country  Storekeepers,  and  Dealers  generally  are
invited  to  call  and  examine,  before  purchasing,  as  they  will  be  dealt  with  on  the
most  liberal  terms.
jggp1  Goods  sent  by  express  to  any  part  of  the  States  or  Territories.
N.B. — Masonic,  Odd  Fellows',  and  other  Emblematic  Marks  made  to  order,  and
with  dispatch.  All  engraving  done  by  the  best  workmen,  and  at  the  cheapest  rates.
The  subscriber  pays  particular  attention  to  the  getting  up  of  Masonic  Emblems.
H.  MULLIGAN,
•  Jmprttr  0f  »tt|ts  »n&  pranfwtanr  at  Ittoritj,
444  NORTH  SECOND  STREET,
PHILADELPHIA,  PA.

--- Sayfa 590 ---
LI
UHlIo
The  Best  and  the  Cheapest.
PUBLISHED  IN  TWO  VOLUMES  OF  768  PAGES  EACH.
Price  $4  per  Vol.,  neatly  Bound  in  Cloth.
This  Library  is  not  only  the  cheapest,  but  comprises  the  best  collection  of  Ma-
sonic works  published.  Some  of  the  books  contained  in  this  publication  are  not  to
be  found  in  any  other  Library.
The  Masonic  Libkaby  contains  the  following  valuable  works : —
■voltjime  i.
THE  ANTIQUITIES  OF  FREEMASONRY,
ANDERSON'S  CONSTITUTIONS,  HISTORY,  ETC.,
Embracing  the  entire  work  as  published  by  the  Grand  Lodge  of  England  in  1723,
the  first  reprint  of  that  work  complete  since  1734.
ILLUSTRATIONS  OF  FREEMASONRY,
A  most  important  work,  without  which  no  Masonic  Library  is  complete,  and  is  a
prerequisite  to  a  complete  knowledge  of  the  history  of  Masonry  from  the  earliest
times.
HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY,
Containing  an  elaborate  history  of  the  Craft  in  England.
BOOK  OF  THE  LODGE,        MANT'S  POCKET  COMPANION,
SANDY'S  HISTORY  OF  FREEMASONRY.
VOLUME    II.
DERMOTT'S  AHIMAN  REZON,
With  lithographic  plate  of  the  "Arms"  of  the  operative  and  of  the  speculative  Ma.
sons ;  published  in  1764,  and  not  published  in  any  other  Library.
SYMBOLIC  DICTIONARY  OF  FREEMASONRY,
HISTORY  OF  INITIATION,
In  which  the  mysteries  of  initiation  into  all  the  mystic  orders  of  the  ancient  nations
are  revealed  and  compared.
HALLIWELL'S  ANCIENT  POEM,
Supposed  to  have  been  written  no  later  than  the  fourteenth  century.
CONSTITUTIONS  OF  FREEMASONRY,
1738  edition.  This  work,  in  a  historical  point  of  view,  is  of  the  Mghest  value.
There  is  a  mystery  involved  in  the  Charges  which  differ  from  the  1723  edition.  This
work  is  not  published  in  any  other  Library.
CONSTITUTIONS  OF  THE  GRAND  LODGE  OF  SCOTLAND.
Each  volume  is  complete  in  itself.
Address  LEON  HTNEMAN,  Publisher,
Masonic  Libbaey  Office,  Philadelphia,  Pa.

--- Sayfa 596 ---
nfUHUi